The Gentling of Red McWha


I


It was heavy sledding on the Upper Ottanoonsis trail. The two
lumbermen were nearing the close of the third day of the hard four
days' haul in from the Settlements to the camp. At the head of the
first team, his broad jaw set and his small grey eyes angry with
fatigue, trudged the big figure of Red McWha, choosing and breaking a
way through the deep snow. With his fiery red head and his large red
face, he was the only one of his colouring in a large family so dark
that they were known as the "Black McWhas," and his temper seemed to
have been chronically soured by the singularity of his type. But he
was a good woodsman and a good teamster, and his horses followed
confidently at his heels like dogs. The second team was led by a tall,
gaunt-jawed, one-eyed lumberman named Jim Johnson, but invariably
known as "Walley." From the fact that his blind eye was of a peculiar
blankness, like whitish porcelain, he had been nicknamed "Wall-Eye";
but, owing to his general popularity, combined with the emphatic
views he held on that particular subject, the name had been mitigated
to Walley.

The two were hauling in supplies for Conroy's Camp, on Little
Ottanoonsis Lake. Silently, but for the clank and creak of the
harness, and the soft "thut, thut" of the trodden snow, the little
procession toiled on through the soundless desolation. Between the
trees--naked birches and scattered, black-green firs--filtered the
lonely, yellowish-violet light of the fading winter afternoon. When
the light had died into ghostly grey along the corridors of the
forest, the teams rounded a turn of the trail, and began to descend
the steep slope which led down to Joe Godding's solitary cabin on the
edge of Burnt Brook Meadows. Presently the dark outline of the cabin
came into view against the pallor of the open clearing.

But there was no light in the window. No homely pungency of wood-smoke
breathed welcome on the bitter air. The cabin looked startlingly
deserted.

"Whoa!" commanded McWha, sharply, and glanced round at Johnson with an
angry misgiving in his eyes. The teams came to a stop with a shiver of
all their bells.

Then, upon the sudden stillness, arose the faint sound of a child's
voice, crying hopelessly.

"Something wrong down yonder!" growled McWha, his expectations of a
hot supper crumbling into dust.

As he spoke, Walley Johnson sprang past him and went loping down the
hill with long, loose strides like a moose.

Red McWha followed very deliberately with the teams. He resented
anything emotional. And he was prepared to feel himself aggrieved.

When he reached the cabin door the sound of weeping had stopped.
Inside he found Walley Johnson on his knees before the stove,
hurriedly lighting a fire. Wrapped in his coat, and clutching his arm
as if afraid he might leave her, stood a tiny, flaxen-haired child,
perhaps five years old. The cabin was cold, almost as cold as the
snapping night outside. Along the middle of the floor, with bedclothes
from the bunk heaped awkwardly upon it in the little one's efforts to
warm it back to responsive life, sprawled rigidly the lank body of Joe
Godding.

Red McWha stared for a moment in silence, then stooped, examined the
dead man's face, and felt his breast.

"Deader'n a herring!" he muttered.

"Yes! the poor old shike-poke!" answered Johnson, without looking up
from his task.

"Heart?" queried McWha, laconically.

Johnson made no reply till the flame caught the kindling and rushed
inwards from the open draught with a cordial roar. Then he stood up.

"Don' know about that," said he. "But he's been dead these hours and
hours! An' the fire out! An' the kid most froze! A sick man like he
was, to've kept the kid alone here with him that way!" And he glanced
down at the dead figure with severe reprobation.

"Never was much good, that Joe Godding!" muttered McWha, always
critical.

As the two woodsmen discussed the situation, the child, a
delicate-featured, blue-eyed girl, was gazing up from under her mop of
bright hair, first at one, then at the other. Walley Johnson was the
one who had come in answer to her long wailing, who had hugged her
close, and wrapped her up, and crooned over her in his pity, and
driven away the terrors. But she did not like to look at him, though
his gaunt, sallow face was strong and kind.

People are apt to talk easy generalities about the intuition of
children! As a matter of fact, the little ones are not above judging
quite as superficially and falsely as their elders. The child looked
at her protector's sightless eye, then turned away and sidled over to
McWha with one hand coaxingly outstretched. McWha's mouth twisted
sourly. Without appearing to see the tiny hand, he deftly evaded it.
Stooping over the dead man, he picked him up, straightened him out
decently on his bunk, and covered him away from sight with the
blankets.

"Ye needn't be so crusty to the kid, when she wants to make up to ye!"
protested Walley, as the little one turned back to him with a puzzled
look in her tearful blue eyes.

"It's all alike they be, six, or sixteen, or sixty-six!" remarked
McWha, sarcastically, stepping to the door. "I don't want none of 'em!
Ye kin look out for 'er! I'm for the horses."

"Don't talk out so loud," admonished the little one. "You'll wake
Daddy. Poor Daddy's sick!"

"Poor lamb!" murmured Johnson, folding her to his great breast with a
pang of pity. "No; we won't wake daddy. Now tell me, what's yer
name?"

"Daddy called me Rosy-Lilly!" answered the child, playing with a
button on Johnson's vest. "Is he gettin' warmer now? He was so cold,
and he wouldn't speak to Rosy-Lilly."

"Rosy-Lilly it be!" agreed Johnson. "Now we jest won't bother daddy,
him bein' so sick! You an' me'll git supper."

The cabin was warm now, and on tiptoe Johnson and Rosy-Lilly went
about their work, setting the table, "bilin' the tea," and frying the
bacon. When Red McWha came in from the barn, and stamped the snow from
his feet, Rosy-Lilly said "Hush!" laid her finger on her lip, and
glanced meaningly at the moveless shape in the bunk.

"We mus' let 'im sleep, Rosy-Lilly says," decreed Johnson, with an
emphasis which penetrated McWha's unsympathetic consciousness, and
elicited a non-committal grunt.

When supper was ready, Rosy-Lilly hung around him for a minute or two
before dragging her chair up to the table. She evidently purposed
paying him the compliment of sitting close beside him and letting him
cut her bacon for her. But finding that he would not even glance at
her, she fetched a deep sigh, and took her place beside Johnson. When
the meal was over and the dishes had been washed up, she let Johnson
put her to bed in her little bunk behind the stove. She wanted to kiss
her father for good-night, as usual; but when Johnson insisted that to
do so might wake him up, and be bad for him, she yielded tearfully;
and they heard her sobbing herself to sleep.

For nearly an hour the two men smoked in silence, their steaming feet
under the stove, their backs turned towards the long, unstirring shape
in the big bunk. At last Johnson stood up and shook himself.

"Well," he drawled, "I s'pose we mus' be doin' the best we kin fer
poor old Joe."

"He ain't left us no ch'ice!" snapped McWha.

"We can't leave him here in the house," continued Johnson, irresolutely.

"No, no!" answered McWha. "He'd ha'nt it, an' us, too, ever after,
like as not. We got to give 'im lumberman's shift, till the Boss kin
send and take 'im back to the Settlement for the parson to do 'im up
right an' proper."

So they rolled poor Joe Godding up in one of the tarpaulins which
covered the sleds, and buried him deep in the snow, under the big elm
behind the cabin, and piled a monument of cordwood above him, so that
the foxes and wild cats could not disturb his lonely sleep, and
surmounted the pile with a rude cross to signify its character. Then,
with lighter hearts, they went back to the cabin fire, which seemed to
burn more freely now that the grim presence of its former master had
been removed.

"Now what's to be done with the kid--with Rosy-Lilly?" began Johnson.

Red McWha took his pipe from his mouth, and spat accurately into the
crack of the grate to signify that he had no opinion on that important
subject.

"They do say in the Settlements as how Joe Godding hain't kith nor kin
in the world, savin' an' exceptin' the kid only," continued Johnson.

McWha nodded indifferently.

"Well," went on Johnson, "we can't do nawthin' but take her on to the
camp now. Mebbe the Boss'll decide she's got to go back to the
Settlement, along o' the fun'ral. But mebbe he'll let the hands keep
her, to kinder chipper up the camp when things gits dull. I reckon
when the boys sees her sweet face they'll all be wantin' to be
guardeens to her."

McWha again spat accurately into the crack of the grate.

"I ain't got no fancy for young 'uns in camp, but ye kin do ez ye
like, Walley Johnson," he answered grudgingly. "Only I want it
understood, right now, I ain't no guardeen, an' won't be, to nawthin'
that walks in petticoats! What I'm thinkin' of is the old cow out
yonder, an' them hens o' Joe's what I seen a-roostin' over the
cowstall."

"Them's all Rosy-Lilly's, an' goes with us an' her to camp to-morrer,"
answered Johnson with decision. "We'll tell the kid as how her daddy
had to be took away in the night because he was so sick, an' couldn't
speak to nobody, an' we was goin' to take keer o' her till he gits
back! An' that's the truth," he added, with a sudden passion of
tenderness and pity in his tone.

At this hint of emotion McWha laughed sarcastically. Then knocking out
his pipe, he proceeded to fill the stove for the night, and spread his
blanket on the floor beside it.

"If ye wants to make the camp a baby-farm," he growled, "don't mind
me!"


II


Under the dominion of Rosy-Lilly fell Conroy's camp at sight,
capitulating unconditionally to the first appeal of her tearful blue
eyes, and little, hurt red mouth. Dan Logan, the Boss, happened to
know just how utterly alone the death of her father had left the
child, and he was the first to propose that the camp should adopt her.
Fully bearing out the faith which Walley Johnson had so confidently
expressed back in the dead man's cabin, Jimmy Brackett, the cook, on
whom would necessarily devolve the chief care of this new member of
his family, jumped to the proposal of the Boss with enthusiastic
support.

"We'll every mother's son o' us be guardeen to her!" he declared, with
the finality appropriate to his office as autocrat second only to the
Boss himself. Every man in camp assented noisily, saving only Red
McWha; and he, as was expected of him, sat back and grinned.

From the first, Rosy-Lilly made herself at home in the camp. For a few
days she fretted after her father, whenever she was left for a moment
to her own devices; but Jimmy Brackett was ever on hand to divert her
mind with astounding fairy-tales during the hours when the rest of the
hands were away chopping and hauling. Long after she had forgotten to
fret, she would have little "cryin' spells" at night, remembering her
father's good-night kiss. But a baby's sorrow, happily, is shorter
than its remembrance; and Rosy-Lilly soon learned to repeat her
phrase: "Poor Daddy had to go 'way-'way-off," without the quivering
lip and wistful look which made the big woodsmen's hearts tighten so
painfully beneath their homespun shirts. Conroy's Camp was a spacious,
oblong cabin of "chinked" logs, with a big stove in the middle. The
bunks were arranged in a double tier along one wall, and a plank table
(rude, but massive) along the other. Built on at one end, beside the
door, was the kitchen, or cookhouse, crowded, but clean and orderly,
and bright with shining tins. At the inner end of the main room a
corner was boarded off to make a tiny bedroom, no bigger than a
cupboard. This was the Boss's private apartment. It contained two
narrow bunks--one for the Boss himself, who looked much too big for
it; and one for the only guest whom the camp ever expected to
entertain, the devoted missionary-priest, who, on his snowshoes, was
wont to make the round of the widely scattered camps once or twice in
a winter. This guest-bunk the Boss at once allotted to Rosy-Lilly, but
on the strict condition that Johnson should continue to act as nurse
and superintend Rosy-Lilly's nightly toilet.

Rosy-Lilly had not been in the camp a week before McWha's "ugliness"
to her had aroused even the Boss's resentment, and the Boss was a
just man. Of course, it was generally recognized that McWha was not
bound, by any law or obligation, to take any notice of the child,
still less to "make a fuss over her," with the rest of the camp. But
Jimmy Brackett expressed the popular sentiment when he growled,
looking sourly at the back of McWha's unconscious red head bowed
ravenously over his plate of beans--

"If only he'd _do_ something, so's we c'ld _lick_ some decency inter
'im!"

There was absolutely nothing to be done about it, however; for Red
McWha was utterly within his rights.

Rosy-Lilly, as we have seen, was not yet five years old; but certain
of the characteristics of her sex were already well developed within
her. The adulation of the rest of the camp, poured out at her tiny
feet, she took graciously enough, but rather as a matter of course. It
was all her due. But what she wanted was that that big, ugly,
red-headed man, with the cross grey eyes and loud voice, should be
nice to her. She wanted _him_ to pick her up, and set her on his knee,
and whittle wonderful wooden dogs and dolls and boats and boxes for
her with his jack-knife, as Walley Johnson and the others did. With
Walley she would hardly condescend to coquet, so sure she was of his
abject slavery to her whims; and, moreover, as must be confessed with
regret, so unforgiving was she in her heart toward his blank eye. She
merely consented to make him useful, much as she might a convenient
and altogether doting but uninteresting grandmother. To all the other
members of the camp--except the Boss, whom she regarded with some
awe--she would make baby-love impartially and carelessly. But it was
Red McWha whose notice she craved.

When supper was over, and pipes filled and lighted, some one would
strike up a "chantey"--one of those interminable, monotonous
ballad-songs which are peculiar to the lumber camps.

These "chanteys," however robust their wordings or their incidents,
are always sung in a plaintive minor which goes oddly with the
large-moulded virility of the singers. Some are sentimental, or
religious, to the last degree, while others reek with an indecency of
speech that would shroud the Tenderloin in blushes. Both kinds are
equally popular in the camps, and both are of the most astounding
_naïveté_. Of the worst of them, even, the simple-minded woodsmen are
not in the least ashamed. They seem unconscious of their enormity.
Nevertheless, it came about that, without a word said by any one, from
the hour of Rosy-Lilly's arrival in camp, all the indecent "chanteys"
were dropped, as if into oblivion, from the woodsmen's repertoire.

During the songs, the smoking, and the lazy fun, Rosy-Lilly would slip
from one big woodsman to another, an inconspicuous little figure in
the smoke-gloomed light of the two oil-lamps. Man after man would
snatch her up to his knee, lay by his pipe, twist her silky, yellow
curls about his great blunt fingers, and whisper wood-folk tales or
baby nonsense into her pink little ear. She would listen solemnly for
a minute or two, then wriggle down and move on to another of her
admirers. But before long she would be standing by the bench on which
sat Red McWha, with one big knee usually hooked high above the other,
and his broad back reclined against the edge of a bunk. For a few
minutes the child would stand there smiling with a perennial
confidence, waiting to be noticed. Then she would come closer, without
a word from her usually nimble little tongue, lean against McWha's
knee, and look up coaxingly into his face. If McWha chanced to be
singing, for he was a "chanter" of some note, he would appear so
utterly absorbed that Rosy-Lilly would at last slip away, with a look
of hurt surprise in her face, to be comforted by one of her faithful.
But if McWha were not engrossed in song, it would soon become
impossible for him to ignore her. He would suddenly look down at her
with his fierce eyes, knit his shaggy red brows, and demand harshly:
"Well, Yaller Top, an' what d'_you_ want?"

From the loud voice and angry eye the child would retreat in haste,
clear to the other end of the room, and sometimes a big tear would
track its way down either cheek. After such an experiment she would
usually seek Jimmy Brackett, who would console her with some sticky
sweetmeat, and strive to wither McWha with envenomed glances. McWha
would reply with a grin, as if proud of having routed the little
adventurer so easily. He had discovered that the name "Yaller Top" was
an infallible weapon of rebuff, as Rosy-Lilly considered it a term of
indignity. To his evil humour there was something amusing in abashing
Rosy-Lilly with the title she most disliked. Moreover, it was an
indirect rebuke to the "saft" way the others acted about her.

If Rosy-Lilly felt rebuffed for the moment by McWha's rudeness, she
seemed always to forget it the next time she saw him. Night after
night she would sidle up to his knee, and sue for his notice; and
night after night she would retire discomfited. But on one occasion
the discomfiture was McWha's. She had elicited the customary rough
demand--

"Well, Yaller Top, what d'_you_ want?"

But this time she held her ground, though with quivering lips.

"Yaller Top ain't my name 'tall," she explained with baby politeness.
"It's Rosy-Lilly; 'n' I jes' thought you _might_ want me to sit on
yer knee a little, teeny minit."

Much taken aback, McWha glanced about the room with a loutish grin.
Then he flushed angrily, as he felt the demand of the sudden silence.
Looking down again, with a scowl, at the expectant little face of
Rosy-Lilly, he growled: "Well, not as I knows of!" and rose to his
feet, thrusting her brusquely aside.

"Ain't he uglier'n hell?" murmured Bird Pigeon to Walley Johnson,
spitting indignantly on the stove-leg. "He'd 'a' cuffed the kid ef he
da'st, he glared at her that ugly!"

"Like to see 'im try it!" responded Johnson through his teeth, with a
look to which his blank eye lent mysterious menace.

The time soon came, however, when McWha resumed his old seat and his
old attitude on the bench. Rosy-Lilly avoided him for two evenings,
but on the third the old fascination got the better of her pique.
McWha saw her coming, and, growing self-conscious, he hurriedly
started up a song with the full strength of his big voice.

The song was a well-known one, and nothing in it to redden the ear of
a maiden; but it was profane with that rich, ingenious amplitude of
profanity which seems almost instinctive among the lumbermen--a sort
of second mother-tongue to them. Had it been any one but McWha who
started it, nothing would have been said; but, as it was, Walley
Johnson took alarm on the instant. To his supersensitive watchfulness,
McWha was singing that song "jest a purpose to be ugly to the kid."
The fact that "the kid" would hardly understand a word of it, did not
occur to him. Rising up from his bench behind the stove he shouted out
across the smoky room: "Shet up that, Red!"

The song stopped. Every one looked inquiringly at Johnson. For several
moments there was silence, broken only by an uneasy shuffling of feet.
Then McWha got up slowly, his eyebrows bristling, his angry eyes
little pin-points. First he addressed himself to Johnson.

"What the ---- business is't o' yourn what I sing?" he demanded,
opening and shutting his big fingers.

"I'll show ye what," began Johnson, in a tense voice. But the Boss
interrupted. Dave Logan was a quiet man, but he ruled his camp.
Moreover, he was a just man, and Johnson had begun the dispute.

"Chuck that, Walley!" he snapped, sharp as a whip. "If there's to be
any row in this here camp, I'll make it myself, an' don't none o' you
boys forgit it!"

McWha turned upon him in angry appeal.

"You're Boss, Dave Logan, an' what you sez goes, fer's I'm
concerned," said he. "But I ax you, _as_ Boss, be this here camp a
_camp_, er a camp-meetin'? Walley Johnson kin go straight to hell; but
ef _you_ sez we 'ain't to sing nawthin' but hymns, why, o' course,
it's hymns for me--till I kin git away to a camp where the hands is
men, an' not wet-nurses!"

"That's all right, Red!" said the Boss. "I kin make allowances for yer
gittin' riled, considerin' the jolt Walley's rude interruption give
ye! He hadn't no right to interrupt, nor no call to. This ain't no
camp-meetin'. The boys have a right to swear all they like. Why,
'twouldn't be noways natural in camp ef the boys couldn't swear!
somethin'd hev to bust before long. An' the boys can't be expected to
go a-tiptoe and talk prunes an' prisms, all along o' a little
yaller-haired kid what's come to brighten up the old camp fer us. That
wouldn't be sense! But all we've got to mind is jest this--_nothin'
vile!_ That's all, boys. We'll worry along without that!"

When the Boss spoke, he liked to explain himself rather fully. When he
ceased, no one had a word to say. Every one was satisfied but Johnson;
and he was constrained to seem so. There was an oppressive silence for
some seconds. It was broken by the soft treble of Rosy-Lilly, who had
been standing before the Boss and gazing up into his face with awed
attention throughout the harangue.

"What did you say, Dave?" she piped, her hands clasped behind her
back.

"Somethin' as shall never tech you, Rosy-Lilly!" declared Johnson,
snatching up the child and bearing her off to bed, amid a roar of
laughter which saved Dave Logan the embarrassment of a reply.

For a time, now, Rosy-Lilly left McWha alone, so markedly that it
looked as if Walley Johnson or Jimmy Brackett had admonished her on
the subject. She continued, indeed, to cast at him eyes of pleading
reproach, but always from a distance, and such appeals rolled off
McWha's crude perception like water off a musk rat's fur. He had
nothing "agin her," as he would have put it, if only she would keep
out of his way. But Rosy-Lilly, true to her sex, was not vanquished by
any means, or even discouraged. She was only biding her time. Bird
Pigeon, who was something of a beau in the Settlements, understood
this, and stirred the loyal wrath of Walley Johnson by saying so.

"There ain't nawthin' about Red McWha to make Rosy-Lilly keer shucks
fer 'im, savin' an' except that she can't git him!" said Bird. "She's
that nigh bein' a woman a'ready, if she _be_ but five year old!"

Johnson fixed him with his disconcerting eye, and retorted witheringly--

"Ye thinks ye knows a pile about women, Bird Pigeon. But the kind ye
knows about ain't the kind Rosy-Lilly's agoin' to be!"

Nearly a week went by before Rosy-Lilly saw another chance to assail
McWha's forbidding defences. This time she made what her innocent
heart conceived to be a tremendous bid for the bad-tempered woodsman's
favour. Incidentally, too, she revealed a secret which the Boss and
Walley Johnson had been guarding with guilty solicitude ever since her
coming to the camp.

It chanced that the Boss and Johnson together were kept away from camp
one night till next morning, laying out a new "landing" over on Fork's
Brook. When it came time for Rosy-Lilly to be put to bed, the honour
fell, as a matter of course, to Jimmy Brackett. Rosy-Lilly went with
him willingly enough, but not till after a moment of hesitation, in
which her eyes wandered involuntarily to the broad, red face of McWha
behind its cloud of smoke.

As a nursemaid, Jimmy Brackett flattered himself that he was a
success--till the moment came when Rosy-Lilly was to be tucked into
her bunk. Then she stood and eyed him with solemn question.

"What's wrong, me honey-bug?" asked Brackett, anxiously.

"You hain't heard me my prayers!" replied Rosy-Lilly, with a touch of
severity in her voice.

"Eh? What's that?" stammered Brackett, startled quite out of his
wonted composure.

"Don't you know little girls has to say their prayers afore they goes
to bed?" she demanded.

"No!" admitted Brackett, truthfully, wondering how he was going to get
out of the unexpected situation.

"Walley Johnson hears me mine!" continued the child, her eyes very
wide open as she weighed Brackett's qualifications in her merciless
little balance.

Here, Brackett was misguided enough to grin, bethinking him that now
he "had the laugh" on the Boss and Walley. That grin settled it.

"I dess you don't know how to hear me say 'em, Jimmy!" she announced
inexorably. And picking up the skirt of her blue homespun "nightie,"
so that she showed her little red woollen socks and white deer-hide
moccasins, she tripped forth into the big, noisy room.

At the bright picture she made, her flax-gold hair tied in a knob on
top of her head that it might not get tangled, the room fell silent
instantly, and every eye was turned upon her. Nothing abashed by the
scrutiny, she made her way sedately down the room and across to
McWha's bench. Unable to ignore her, and angry at the consciousness
that he was embarrassed, McWha eyed her with a grim stare. But
Rosy-Lilly put out her hands to him confidingly.

"I'm goin' to let you hear me my prayers," she said, her clear, baby
voice carrying every syllable to the furthest corner of the room.

An ugly light flamed into McWha's eyes, and he sprang to his feet,
brushing the child rudely aside.

"That's some o' Jimmy Brackett's work!" he shouted. "It's him put 'er
up to it, curse him!"

The whole room burst into a roar of laughter at the sight of his
wrath. Snatching his cap from its peg, he strode furiously out to the
stable, slamming the door behind him.

In their delight over McWha's discomfiture the woodsmen quite forgot
the feelings of Rosy-Lilly. For a second or two she stood motionless,
her lips and eyes wide open with amazement. Then, hurt as much by the
laughter of the room as by McWha's rebuff, she burst into tears, and
stood hiding her face with both hands, the picture of desolation.

When the men realized that she thought they were laughing at her, they
shut their mouths with amazing promptitude, and crowded about her. One
after another picked her up, striving to console her with caresses and
extravagant promises. She would not uncover her eyes, however, for any
one, and her heart-broken wailing was not hushed till Brackett thrust
his way through the crowd, growling inarticulate blasphemies at them
all, and bore her back to her room. When he emerged twenty minutes
later no one asked him about Rosy-Lilly's prayers. As for Rosy-Lilly,
her feelings were this time so outraged that she would no longer look
at McWha.


III


The long backwoods winter was now drawing near its end, and the snow
in the open spaces was getting so soft at midday as to slump heavily
and hinder the work of the teams. Every one was working with feverish
haste to get the logs all out to the "landings," on the river banks
before the hauling should go to pieces. At night the tired lumbermen
would tumble into their bunks as soon as supper was over, too greedy
of sleep to think of songs or yarns. And Rosy-Lilly began to feel a
little aggrieved at the inadequate attention which she was now
receiving from all but Jimmy Brackett and the ever-faithful Johnson.
She began to forgive McWha, and once more to try her baby wiles upon
him. But McWha was as coldly unconscious as a stone.

One day, however, Fate concluded to range herself on Rosy-Lilly's
side. A dead branch, hurled through the air by the impact of a falling
tree, struck Red McWha on the head, and he was carried home to the
cabin unconscious, bleeding from a long gash in his scalp. The Boss,
something of a surgeon in his rough and ready way, as bosses need to
be, washed the wound and sewed it up. Then he handed over his own bunk
to the wounded man, declaring optimistically that McWha would come
round all right, his breed being hard to kill.

It was hours later when McWha began to recover consciousness, and just
then, as it happened, there was no one near him but Rosy-Lilly.
Smitten with pity, the child was standing beside the bunk, murmuring:
"Poor! poor! I so sorry!" and slowly shaking her head and lightly
patting the big, limp hand where it lay outside the blanket.

McWha half opened his eyes, and their faint glance fell on the top of
Rosy-Lilly's head as she bent over his hand. With a wry smile he shut
them again, but to his surprise, he felt rather gratified. Then Jimmy
Brackett came in and whisked the child away. "'S if he thought I'd
bite 'er!" mused McWha, somewhat inconsistently.

For a long time he lay wondering confusedly. At last he opened his
eyes wide, felt his bandaged head, and called for a drink of water in
a voice which he vainly strove to make sound natural. To his surprise
he was answered by Rosy-Lilly, so promptly that it was as if she had
been listening for his voice. She came carrying the tin of water in
both little hands, and, lifting it very carefully, she tried to hold
it to his lips. Neither she nor McWha was quite successful in this,
however. While they were fumbling over it, Jimmy Brackett hurried in,
followed by the Boss, and Rosy-Lilly's nursing was superseded. The
Boss had to hold him up so that he could drink; and when he had
feverishly gulped about a quart, he lay back on his pillow with a huge
sigh, declaring weakly that he was all right.

"Ye got off mighty easy, Red," said the Boss, cheerfully, "considerin'
the heft o' the knot 'at hit ye. But you McWhas was always hard to
kill."

McWha's hand was drooping loosely over the edge of the bunk. He felt
the child's tiny fingers brushing it again softly and tenderly. Then
he felt her lips upon it, and the sensation was so novel that he quite
forgot to reply to the Boss's pleasantry.

That night McWha was so much better that when he insisted on being
removed to his own bunk on the plea that he "didn't feel at home in a
cupboard like," the Boss consented. Next day he wanted to go back to
work, but the Boss was derisively inexorable, and for two days McWha
was kept a prisoner.

During this time Jimmy Brackett, with severe and detailed admonition,
kept Rosy-Lilly from again obtruding upon the patient's leisure; and
McWha had nothing to do but smoke and whittle. He whittled diligently,
but let no one see what he was making. Then, borrowing a small tin cup
from the cook, he fussed over the stove with some dark, smelly
decoction of tobacco-juice and ink. Rosy-Lilly was consumed with
curiosity, especially when she saw him apparently digging beads off an
Indian tobacco-pouch which he always carried. But she did not go near
enough to get enlightened as to his mysterious occupation.

On the following day McWha went to work again, but not till after
breakfast, when the others had long departed. Rosy-Lilly, with one
hand twisted in her little apron, was standing in the doorway as he
passed out. She glanced up at him with the most coaxing smile in her
whole armoury of allurements. McWha would not look at her, and his
face was as sullenly harsh as ever; but as he passed he slipped
something into her hand. To her speechless delight, it proved to be a
little dark-brown wooden doll, daintily carved, and with two white
beads, with black centres, cunningly set into its face for eyes.

Rosy-Lilly hugged the treasure to her breast. Her first proud impulse
was to run to Jimmy Brackett with it. But a subtler instinct withheld
her. The gift had been bestowed in such a surreptitious way that she
felt it to be somehow a kind of secret. She carried it away and hid it
in her bunk, where she would go and look at it from time to time
throughout the day. That night she brought it forth, but with several
other treasures, so that it quite escaped comment. She said nothing
about it to McWha, but she played with it when he could not help
seeing it. And thereafter her "nigger-baby" was always in her arms.

This compliment, however, was apparently all lost on McWha, who had
again grown unconscious of her existence. And Rosy-Lilly, on her part,
no longer strove to win his attention. She was content either with the
victory she had won, or with the secret understanding which, perforce,
now existed between them. And things went on smoothly in the camp,
with every one now too occupied to do more than mind his own
business.

It chanced this year that the spring thaws were early and unusually
swift, warm rains alternating with hot, searching sunshine which
withered and devoured the snow. The ice went out with a rush in the
rapidly rising Ottanoonsis; and from every brookside "landing" the
logs came down in black, tumbling swarms. Just below Conroy's Camp the
river wallowed round a narrow bend, tangled with slate ledges. It was
a nasty place enough at low water, but in freshet a roaring terror to
all the river-men. When the logs were running in any numbers, the bend
had to be watched with vigilance lest a jam should form, and the
waters be dammed back, and the lumber get "hung up" all over the
swamps of the upper reaches.

And here, now, in spite of the frantic efforts of Dave Logan and his
crew, the logs suddenly began to jam. Pitching downward as if
propelled by a pile-driver, certain great timbers drove their ends
between the upstanding strata of the slate, and held against the
torrent till others came and wedged them securely. The jam began
between two ledges in midstream, where no one could get near it. In a
few minutes the interlocked mass stretched from bank to bank, with the
torrent spurting and spouting through it in furious milk-white jets.
Log after log was chopped free by the axemen along the shore, but the
mass remained unshaken. Meanwhile the logs were gathering swiftly
behind, ramming down and solidifying the whole structure, and damming
back the flood till its heavy thunder diminished to the querulous
rattling of a mill-race. In a short time the river was packed solid
from shore to shore for several hundred yards above the brow of the
jam; and above that again the waters were rising at a rate which
threatened in a few hours to flood the valley and sweep away the camp
itself.

At this stage of affairs the Boss, axe in hand, picked his way across
the monstrous tangle of the face of the jam between the great white
jets, till he gained the centre of the structure. Here his practised
eye, with the aid of a perilous axe-stroke here and there,--strokes
which might possibly bring the whole looming mass down upon him in a
moment,--presently located the timbers which held the structure firm,
"the key-logs," as the men call them. These he marked with his axe.
Then, returning to the shore, he called for two volunteers to dare the
task of cutting these key-logs away.

Such a task is the most perilous that a lumberman, in all his daring
career, can be called upon to perform. So perilous is it that it is
always left to volunteers. Dave Logan had some brilliant feats of
jam-breaking to his credit, from the days before he was made a Boss;
and now, when he called for volunteers, every unmarried man in camp
responded, with the exception, of course, of Walley Johnson, whose
limited vision unfitted him for such a venture. The Boss chose Bird
Pigeon and Andy White, because they were not only "smart" axemen, but
also adepts in the river-men's games of "running logs."

With a jaunty air the two young men spat on their hands, gripped their
axes, and sprang out along the base of the jam. Every eye in camp was
fixed upon them with a fearful interest as they plied their heavy
blades. It was heroic, of a magnificence of valour seldom equalled on
any field, the work of these two, chopping coolly out there in the
daunting tumult, under that colossal front of death. Their duty was
nothing less than to bring the toppling brow of the jam down upon
them, yet cheat Fate at the last instant, if possible, by leaping to
shore before the chaos quite overwhelmed them.

Suddenly, while the two key-logs were not yet half cut through, the
trained eye of the Boss detected a settling near the top of the jam.
His yell of warning tore through the clamour of the waters. At the
instant came a vast grumbling, like underground thunder, not loud
apparently, yet dulling all other sounds. The two choppers sprang
wildly for shore, as the whole face of the jam seemed to crumble in a
breath.

At this moment a scream of terror was heard--and every heart stopped.
Some thirty yards or so upstream, and a dozen, perhaps, from shore,
stood Rosy-Lilly, on a log. While none were observing her she had
gleefully clambered out over the solid mass, looking for spruce-gums.
But now, when the logs moved, she was so terror-stricken that she
could not even try to get ashore. She just fell down upon her log, and
clung to it, screaming.

A groan of horror went up. The awful grinding of the break-up was
already under way. To every trained eye it was evident that there was
no human possibility of reaching the child, much less of saving her.
To attempt it would be such a madness as to jump into the hopper of a
mill. The crowd surged to the edge--and sprang back as the nearest
logs bounded up at them. Except Walley Johnson. He leaped wildly out
upon the nearest logs, fell headforemost, and was dragged back,
fighting furiously, by a dozen inexorable hands.

Just as Johnson went down, there arose a great bellowing cry of rage
and anguish; then Red McWha's big form shot past, leaping far out upon
the logs. Over the sickening upheaval he bounded this way and that,
with miraculous sure-footedness. He reached the pitching log whereon
Rosy-Lilly still clung. He clutched her by the frock. He tucked her
under one arm like a rag-baby. Then he turned, balancing himself for
an instant, and came leaping back towards shore.

A great shout of wonder and joy went up--to be hushed in a second as a
log reared high in McWha's path and hurled him backwards. Right down
into the whirl of the dreadful grist he sank. But with a strength that
seemed more than human he recovered himself, climbed forth dripping,
and came on again with those great, unerring leaps. This time there
was no shout. The men waited with dry throats. They saw that his ruddy
face had gone white as chalk. Within two feet of shore a log toward
which he had jumped was jerked aside just before he reached it, and,
turning in the air as he fell, so as to save the child, he came down
across it on his side with stunning violence. As he fell the Boss and
Brackett and two of the others sprang out to meet him. They reached
him somehow, and covered with bruises which they did not feel,
succeeded in dragging him, with his precious burden, up from the
grinding hell to safety. When his feet touched solid ground he sank
unconscious, but with his arm so securely gripped about the child that
they had difficulty in loosing his hold.

Rosy-Lilly, when they picked her up, was quivering with terror, but
unharmed. When she saw McWha stretched out upon the bank motionless,
with his eyes shut and his white lips half open, she fought savagely
to be put down. She ran and flung herself down beside her rescuer,
caught his big white face between her tiny hands, and fell to kissing
him. Presently McWha opened his eyes, and with a mighty effort rose
upon one elbow. A look of embarrassment passed over his face as he
glanced at the men standing about him. Then he looked down at
Rosy-Lilly, grinned with a shamefaced tenderness, and pulled her
gently towards him.

"I'm right--glad--ye--" he began with painful effort. But before he
could complete the sentence his eyes changed, and he fell back with a
clicking gasp.

Jimmy Brackett, heedless of her wailing protests, snatched up
Rosy-Lilly, and carried her back to the camp.