VI


On the afternoon before Christmas of that year, the North Station in
Boston was filled with hurrying throngs on the way home for the
holidays. Everybody looked tired and excited, but most of them had
happy faces, and men and women alike had as many bundles as they could
carry; bundles and boxes quite unlike the brown paper ones with which
commuters are laden on ordinary days. These were white packages,
beribboned and beflowered and behollied and bemistletoed, to be gently
carried and protected from crushing.

The train was filled to overflowing and many stood in the aisles until
Latham Junction was reached and the overflow alighted to change cars
for Greentown and way stations.

Among the crowd were two men with suit-cases who hurried into the way
train and, entering the smoking car from opposite ends, met in the
middle of the aisle, dropped their encumbrances, stretched out a hand
and ejaculated in the same breath:

"Dick Larrabee, upon my word!"

"Dave Gilman, by all that's great!--Here, let's turn over a seat for
our baggage and sit together. Going home, I s'pose?"

The men had not met for some years, but each knew something of the
other's circumstances and hoped that the other didn't know too much.
They scanned each other's faces, Dick thinking that David looked
pinched and pale, David half-heartedly registering the quick
impression that Dick was prosperous.

"Yes," David answered; "I'm going home for a couple of days. It's such
a confounded journey to that one-horse village that a business man
can't get there but once in a generation!"

"Awful hole!" confirmed Dick. "Simply awful hole! I didn't get it out
of my system for years."

"Married?" asked David.

"No; rather think I'm not the marrying kind, though the fact is I've
had no time for love affairs--too busy. Let's see, you have a child,
haven't you?"

"Yes; Letty has seen to all that business for me since my wife died."
(Wild horses couldn't have dragged the information from him that the
"child" was "twins," and Dick didn't need it anyway, for he had heard
the news the morning he left Beulah.) "Wonder if there have been many
changes in the village?"

"Don't know; there never used to be! Mrs. Popham has been ailing for
years,--she couldn't die; and Deacon Todd wouldn't!" Dick's old
animosities still lingered faintly in his memory, though his laughing
voice and the twinkle in his eyes showed plainly that no bitterness
was left. "How's business with you, David?"

"Only so-so. I've had the devil's own luck lately. Can't get anything
that suits me or that pays a decent income. I formed a new connection
the other day, but I can't say yet what there is in it. I'm just out
of hospital; operation; they cut out the wrong thing first, I believe,
sewed me up absent-mindedly, then remembered it was the other thing,
and did it over again. At any rate, that's the only way I can account
for their mewing me up there for two months."

"Well, well, that is hard luck! I'm sorry, old boy! Things didn't
begin to go my way either till within the last few months. I've always
made a fair living and saved a little money, but never gained any real
headway. Now I've got a first-rate start and the future looks pretty
favorable, and best of all, pretty safe.--No trouble at home calls you
back to Beulah? I hope Letty is all right?" Dick cast an anxious side
glance at David, though he spoke carelessly.

"Oh, no! Everything's serene, so far as I know. I'm a poor
correspondent, especially when I've no good news to tell; and anyway,
the mere sight of a pen ties my tongue. I'm just running down to
surprise Letty."

Dick looked at David again. He began to think he didn't like him. He
used to, when they were boys, but when he brought that unaccountable
wife home and foisted her and her babies on Letty, he rather turned
against him. David was younger than himself, four or five years
younger, but he looked as if he hadn't grown up. Surely his boyhood
chum hadn't used to be so pale and thin-chested or his mouth so
ladylike and pretty. A good face, though; straight and clean, with
honest eyes and a likable smile. Lack of will, perhaps, or a
persistent run of ill luck. Letty had always kept him stiffened up in
the old days. Dick recalled one of his father's phrases to the effect
that Dave Gilman would spin on a very small biscuit, and wondered if
it were still true.

"And you, Dick? Your father's still living? You see I haven't kept up
with Beulah lately."

"Keeping up with Beulah! It sounds like the title of a novel, but the
hero would have to be a snail or he'd pass Beulah in the first
chapter!--Yes, father's hale and hearty, I believe."

"You come home every Christmas, I s'pose?" inquired David.

"No; as a matter of fact this is my first visit since I left for
good."

"That's about my case." And David, hung his head a little,
unconsciously.

"That so? Well, I was a hot-headed fool when I said good-bye to
Beulah, and it's taken me all this time to cool off and make up my
mind to apologize to the dad. There's--there's rather a queer
coincidence about my visit just at this time."

"Speaking of coincidences," said David, "I can beat yours, whatever it
is. If the thought of your father brought you back, my mother drew
me--this way!" And he took something from his inside coat pocket.--"Do
you see that?"

Dick regarded the object blankly, then with a quick gesture dived into
his pocket and brought forth another of the same general character.
"How about this?" he asked.

Each had one of Reba Larrabee's Christmas cards but David had the
first unsuccessful one and Dick the popular one with the lonely
little gray house and the verse about the folks back home.

The men looked at each other in astonishment and Dick gave a low
whistle. Then they bent over the cards together.

"It was mother's picture that pulled me back to Beulah, I don't mind
telling you," said David, his mouth twitching. "Don't you see it?"

"Oh! Is that your mother?" And Dick scanned the card closely.

"Don't you remember her portrait that always hung there after she
died?"

"Yes, of course!" And Dick's tone was apologetic. "You see the face is
so small I didn't notice it, but I recognize it now and remember the
portrait."

"Then the old sitting-room!" exclaimed David. "Look at the rag carpet
and the blessed old andirons! Gracious! I've crawled round those
Hessian soldiers, burned my fingers and cracked my skull on 'em, often
enough when I was a kid! When I'd studied the card five minutes, I
bought a ticket and started for home."

David's eyes were suffused and his lip trembled.

"I don't wonder," said Dick. "I recognize the dear old room right
enough, and of course I should know Letty."

"It didn't occur to me that it _was_ Letty for some time," said her
brother. "There's just the glimpse of a face shown, and no real
likeness."

"Perhaps not," agreed Dick. "A stranger wouldn't have known it for
Letty, but if it had been only that cape I should have guessed. It's
as familiar as Mrs. Popham's bugle bonnet, and much prettier. She wore
it every winter, skating, you know,--and it's just the color of her
hair."

"Letty has a good-shaped head," said David judicially. "It shows, even
in the card."

"And a remarkable ear," added Dick, "so small and so close to her
head."

"I never notice people's ears," confessed David.

"Don't you? I do, and eyelashes, too. Mother's got Letty's eyelashes
down fine.--She's changed, Dave, Letty has! That hurts me. She was
always so gay and chirpy. In this picture she has a sad, far-away,
listening look, but mother may have put that in just to make it
interesting."

"Or perhaps I've had something to do with the change of expression!"
thought David. "What attracted me first," he added, "was your
mother's verses. She always had a knack of being pious without
cramming piety down your throat. I liked that open door. It meant
welcome, no matter how little you'd deserved it."

"Where'd you get your card, Dave?" asked Dick. "It's prettier than
mine."

"A nurse brought it to me in the hospital just because she took a
fancy to it. She didn't know it would mean anything to me, but it
did--a relapse!" And David laughed shamedfacedly. "I guess she'll
confine herself to beef tea after this!--Where'd you get yours?"

"Picked it up on a dentist's mantelpiece when I was waiting for an
appointment. I was traveling round the room, hands in my pockets, when
suddenly I saw this card standing up against an hour-glass. The color
caught me. I took it to the window, and at first I was puzzled. It
certainly was Letty's house. The door's open you see and there's
somebody in the window. I knew it was Letty, but how could any card
publisher have found the way to Beulah? Then I discovered mother's
initials snarled up in holly, and remembered that she was always
painting and illuminating."

"Queer job, life is!" said David, putting his card back in his pocket
and wishing there were a little more time, or that he had a little
more courage, so that he might confide in Dick Larrabee. He felt a
desire to tell him some of the wretchedness he had lived through. It
would be a comfort just to hint that his unhappiness had made him a
coward, so that the very responsibilities that serve as a spur to
some men had left him until now cold, unstirred, unvitalized.

"You're right!" Dick answered. "Life is a queer job and it doesn't do
to shirk it. And just as queer as anything in life is the way that
mother's Christmas cards brought us back to Beulah! They acted as a
sort of magic, didn't they?--Jiminy! I believe the next station is
Beulah. I hope the depot team will be hitched up."

"Yes, here we are; seven o'clock and the train only thirty-five
minutes late. It always made a point of that on holidays!"

"Never mind!" And Dick's tone was as gay as David's was sober. "The
bean-pot will have gone back to the cellarway and the doughnuts to the
crock, but the 'folks back home' 'll get 'em out for us, and a mince
pie, too, and a cut of sage cheese."

"There won't be any 'folks back home,' we're so late, I'm thinking.
There's always a Christmas Eve festival at the church, you know. They
never change--in Beulah."

"Then, by George, they can have me for Santa Claus!" said Dick as they
stepped out on the platform. "Why, it doesn't seem cold at all; yet
look at the ice on the river! What skating, and what a moon! My
blood's up, and if I find the parsonage closed, I'll follow on to the
church and make my peace with the members. There's a kind of spell on
me! For the first time in years I feel as though I could shake hands
with Deacon Todd."

"Well, Merry Christmas to you, Dick,--I'm going to walk. Good
gracious! Have you come to spend the winter?" For various bags and
parcels were being flung out on the platform with that indifference
and irresponsibility that bespeak the touch of the seasoned
baggage-handler.

"You didn't suppose I was coming back to Beulah empty-handed, on
Christmas Eve, did you? If I'm in time for the tree, I'm going to give
those blue-nosed, frost-bitten little youngsters something to
remember! Jump in, Dave, and ride as far as the turn of the road."

In a few minutes the tottering old sign-board that marked the way to
Beulah Center hove in sight, and David jumped from the sleigh to take
his homeward path.

"Merry Christmas again, Dick!" he waved.

"Same to you, Dave! I'll come myself to say it to Letty the first
minute I see smoke coming from your chimney to-morrow morning. Tell
her you met me, will you, and that my visit is partly for her, only
that father had to have his turn first. She'll know why. Tell her
mother's card had Christmas magic in it, tell--"

"Say, tell her the rest yourself, will you, Dick?" And Dave broke into
a run down the hill road that led to Letty.

"I will, indeed!" breathed Dick into his muffler.




[Illustration]