I


It was Christmas Eve and a Saturday night when Mrs. Larrabee, the
Beulah minister's wife, opened the door of the study where her husband
was deep in the revision of his next day's sermon, and thrust in her
comely head framed in a knitted rigolette.

"Luther, I'm going to run down to Letty's. We think the twins are
going to have measles; it's the only thing they haven't had, and
Letty's spirits are not up to concert pitch. You look like a blessed
old prophet to-night, my dear! What's the text?"

The minister pushed back his spectacles and ruffled his gray hair.

"Isaiah VI, 8: '_And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying
whom shall I send?... Then said I, Here am I, send me!_'"

"It doesn't sound a bit like Christmas, somehow."

"It has the spirit, if it hasn't the sound," said the minister. "There
is always so little spare money in the village that we get less and
less accustomed to sharing what we have with others. I want to remind
the people that there are different ways of giving, and that the
bestowing of one's self in service and good deeds can be the best of
all gifts. Letty Boynton won't need the sermon!--Don't be late, Reba."

"Of course not. When was I ever late? It has just struck seven and
I'll be back by eight to choose the hymns. And oh! Luther, I have some
fresh ideas for Christmas cards and I am going to try my luck with
them in the marts of trade. There are hundreds of thousands of such
things sold nowadays; and if the 'Boston Banner' likes my verses well
enough to send me the paper regularly, why shouldn't the people who
make cards like them too, especially when I can draw and paint my own
pictures?"

"I've no doubt they'll like them; who wouldn't? If the parish knew
what a ready pen you have, they'd suspect that you help me in my
sermons! The question is, will the publishers send you a check, or
only a copy of your card?"

"I should relish a check, I confess; but oh! I should like almost as
well a beautifully colored card, Luther, with a picture of my own
inventing on it, my own verse, and R. L. in tiny letters somewhere in
the corner! It would make such a lovely Christmas present! And I
should be so proud; inside of course, not outside! I would cover my
halo with my hat so that nobody in the congregation would ever notice
it!"

The minister laughed.

"Consult Letty, my dear. David used to be in some sort of picture
business in Boston. She will know, perhaps, where to offer your
card!"

At the introduction of a new theme into the conversation Mrs. Larrabee
slipped into a chair by the door, her lantern swinging in her hand.

"David can't be as near as Boston or we should hear of him sometimes.
A pretty sort of brother to be meandering foot-loose over the earth,
and Letty working her fingers to the bone to support his
children--twins at that! It was just like David Gilman to have twins!
Doesn't it seem incredible that he can let Christmas go by without a
message? I dare say he doesn't even remember that his babies were born
on Christmas eve. To be sure he is only Letty's half-brother, but
after all they grew up together and are nearly the same age."

"You always judged David a little severely, Reba. Don't despair of
reforming any man till you see the grass growing over his bare bones.
I always have a soft spot in my heart for him when I remember his
friendship for my Dick; but that was before your time.--Oh! these
boys, these boys!" The minister's voice quavered. "We give them our
very life-blood. We love them, cherish them, pray over them, do our
best to guide them, yet they take the path that leads from home. In
some way, God knows how, we fail to call out the return love, or even
the filial duty and respect!--Well, we won't talk about it, Reba; my
business is to breathe the breath of life into my text: 'Here am I,
Lord, send me!' Letty certainly continues to say it heroically,
whatever her troubles."

"Yes, Letty is so ready for service that she will always be sent, till
the end of time; but if David ever has an interview with his Creator
I can hear him say: 'Here am I, Lord; send Letty!'"

The minister laughed again. He laughed freely and easily nowadays. His
first wife had been a sort of understudy for a saint, and after a
brief but depressing connubial experience she had died, leaving him
with a boy of six; a boy who already, at that tender age, seemed to
cherish a passionate aversion to virtue in any form--the result,
perhaps, of daily doses of the catechism administered by an abnormally
pious mother.

The minister had struggled valiantly with his paternal and parochial
cares for twelve lonely years when he met, wooed, and won (very much
to his astonishment and exaltation) Reba Crosby. There never was a
better bargain driven! She was forty-five by the family Bible but
twenty-five in face, heart, and mind, while he would have been printed
as sixty in "Who's Who in New Hampshire" although he was far older in
patience and experience and wisdom. The minister was spiritual, frail,
and a trifle prone to self-depreciation; the minister's new wife was
spirited, vigorous, courageous, and clever. She was also Western-born,
college-bred, good as gold, and invincibly, incurably gay. The
minister grew younger every year, for Reba doubled his joys and halved
his burdens, tossing them from one of her fine shoulders to the other
as if they were feathers. She swept into the quiet village life of
Beulah like a salt sea breeze. She infused a new spirit into the bleak
church "sociables" and made them positively agreeable functions. The
choir ceased from wrangling, the Sunday School plucked up courage and
flourished like a green bay tree. She managed the deacons, she braced
up the missionary societies, she captivated the parish, she cheered
the depressed and depressing old ladies and cracked jokes with the
invalids.

"Ain't she a little mite too jolly for a minister's wife?" questioned
Mrs. Ossian Popham, who was a professional pessimist.

"If this world is a place of want, woe, wantonness, an' wickedness,
same as you claim, Maria, I don't see how a minister's wife _can_ be
too jolly!" was her husband's cheerful reply. "Look how she's melted
up the ice in both congregations, so't the other church is most
willin' we should prosper, so long as Mis' Larrabee stays here an' we
don't get too fur ahead of 'em in attendance. Me for the smiles,
Maria!"

And Osh Popham was right; for Reba Larrabee convinced the members of
the rival church (the rivalry between the two being in rigidity of
creed, not in persistency in good works) that there was room in heaven
for at least two denominations; and said that if they couldn't unite
in this world, perhaps they'd get round to it in the next. Finally,
she saved Letitia Boynton's soul alive by giving her a warm,
understanding friendship, and she even contracted to win back the
minister's absent son some time or other, and convince him of the
error of his ways.

"Let Dick alone a little longer, Luther," she would say; "don't hurry
him, for he won't come home so long as he's a failure; it would please
the village too much, and Dick hates the village. He doesn't accept
our point of view, that we must love our enemies and bless them that
despitefully use us. The village did despitefully use Dick, and for
that matter, David Gilman too. They were criticized, gossiped about,
judged without mercy. Nobody believed in them, nobody ever praised
them;--and what is that about praise being the fructifying sun in
which our virtues ripen, or something like that? I'm not quoting it
right, but I wish I'd said it. They were called wild when most of
their wildness was exuberant vitality; their mistakes were magnified,
their mad pranks exaggerated. If I'd been married to you, my dear,
while Dick was growing up, I wouldn't have let you keep him here in
this little backwater of life; he needed more room, more movement.
They wouldn't have been so down on him in Racine, Wisconsin!"

Mrs. Larrabee lighted her lantern, closed the door behind her, and
walked briskly down the lonely road that led from the parsonage at
Beulah Corner to Letitia Boynton's house. It was bright moonlight and
the ground was covered with light-fallen snow, but the lantern habit
was a fixed one among Beulah ladies, who, even when they were not
widows or spinsters, made their evening calls mostly without escort.
The light of a lantern not only enabled one to pick the better side of
a bad road, but would illuminate the face of any male stranger who
might be of a burglarious or murderous disposition. Reba Larrabee was
not a timid person; indeed, she was wont to say that men were so
scarce in Beulah that unless they were out-and-out ruffians it would
be an inspiration to meet a few, even if it were only to pass them in
the middle of the road.

There was a light in the meeting-house as she passed, and then there
was a long stretch of shining white silence unmarked by any human
habitation till she came to the tumble-down black cottage inhabited by
"Door-Button" Davis, as the little old man was called in the village.
In the distance she could see Osh Popham's two-story house brilliantly
illuminated by kerosene lamps, and as she drew nearer she even
descried Ossian himself, seated at the cabinet organ in his
shirt-sleeves, practicing the Christmas anthem, his daughter holding a
candle to the page while she struggled to adjust a circuitous alto to
her father's tenor. On the hither side of the Popham house, and quite
obscured by it, stood Letitia Boynton's one-story gray cottage. It had
a clump of tall cedar trees for background and the bare branches of
the elms in front were hung lightly with snow garlands. As Mrs.
Larrabee came closer, she set down her lantern and looked fixedly at
the familiar house as if something new arrested her gaze.

"It looks like a little night-light!" she thought. "And how queer of
Letty to be sitting at the open window!"

Nearer still she crept, yet not so near as to startle her friend. A
tall brass candlestick, with a lighted tallow candle in it, stood on
the table in the parlor window; but the room in which Letty sat was
unlighted save by the fire on the hearth, which gleamed brightly
behind the quaint andirons--Hessian soldiers of iron, painted in gay
colors. Over the mantel hung the portrait of Letty's mother, a benign
figure clad in black silk, the handsome head topped by a snowy muslin
cap with floating strings. Just round the corner of the fireplace was
a half-open door leading into a tiny bedroom, and the flickering flame
lighted the heads of two sleeping children, arms interlocked, bright
tangled curls flowing over one pillow.

Letty herself sat in a low chair by the open window wrapped in an old
cape of ruddy brown homespun, from the folds of which her delicate
head rose like a flower in a bouquet of autumn leaves. One elbow
rested on the table; her chin in the cup of her hand. Her head was
turned away a little so that one could see only the knot of bronze
hair, the curve of a cheek, and the sweep of an eyelash.

"What a picture!" thought Reba. "The very thing for my Christmas card!
It would do almost without a change, if only she is willing to let me
use her."

"Wake up, Letty!" she called. "Come and let me in!--Why, your front
door isn't closed!"

"The fire smoked a little when I first lighted it," said Letty, rising
when her friend entered, and then softly shutting the bedroom door
that the children might not waken. "The night is so mild and the room
so warm, I couldn't help opening the window to look at the moon on the
snow. Sit down, Reba! How good of you to come when you've been
rehearsing for the Christmas Tree exercises all the afternoon."




[Illustration]