V


A good deal of water had run under Beulah Bridge since Letty Boynton
had sat at her window on a December evening unconsciously furnishing
copy and illustration for a Christmas card; yet there had been very
few outward changes in the village. Winter had melted into spring,
burst into summer, faded into autumn, lapsed into winter again,--the
same old, ever-recurring pageant in the world of Nature, and the same
procession of incidents in the neighborhood life.

The harvest moon and the hunter's moon had come and gone; the first
frost, the family dinners and reunions at Thanksgiving, the first
snowfall; and now, as Christmas approached, the same holiday spirit
was abroad in the air, slightly modified as it passed by Mrs. Popham's
mournful visage.

One or two babies had swelled the census, giving the minister hope of
a larger Sunday-School; one or two of the very aged neighbors had
passed into the beyond; and a few romantic and enterprising young
farmers had espoused wives, among them Osh Popham's son.

The manner of their choice was not entirely to the liking of the
village. Digby Popham had married into the rival church and as his
betrothed was a masterful young lady it was feared that Digby would
leave Mr. Larrabee's flock to worship with his wife. Another had
married without visible means of support, a proceeding always to be
regretted by thoroughly prudent persons over fifty; and the third,
Deacon Todd's eldest son, had somehow or other met a siren from
Vermont and insisted on wedding her when there were plenty of
marriageable girls in Beulah.

"I've no patience with such actions!" grumbled Mrs. Popham. "Young
folks are so full of notions nowadays that they look for change and
excitement everywheres. I s'pose James Todd thinks it's a decent,
respectable way of actin', to turn his back on the girls he's been
brought up an' gone to school with, and court somebody he never laid
eyes on till a year ago. It's a free country, but I must say I don't
think it's very refined for a man to go clear off somewheres and marry
a perfect stranger!"

Births, marriages, and deaths, however, paled into insignificance
compared with the spectacular debut of the minister's wife as a writer
and embellisher of Christmas cards, two at least having been seen at
the local milliner's store. How many she had composed, and how many of
them (said Mrs. Popham) might have been rejected, nobody knew, though
there was much speculation; and more than one citizen remarked on the
size of the daily package of mail matter handed out by the rural
delivery man at the parsonage gate.

No one but Mrs. Larrabee and Letty Boynton were in possession of all
the thrilling details attending the public appearance of these works
of art; the words and letters of appreciation, the commendation, and
the occasional blows to pride that attended their acceptance and
publication.

Mrs. Larrabee's first attempt, with the sketch of Letty at the window
on Christmas Eve, her hearth-fire aglow, her heart and her door open
that Love might enter in if the Christ Child came down the snowy
street,--this went to the Excelsior Card Company in a large Western
city, and the following correspondence ensued:

     MRS. LUTHER LARRABEE,
          _Beulah, N.H._

     DEAR MADAM:--

     Your letter bears a well-known postmark, for my father and
     my grandfather were born and lived in New Hampshire, "up
     Beulah way." I accept your verses because of the beauty of
     the picture that accompanied them, and because Christmas
     means more than holly and plum pudding and gift-laden trees
     to me, for I am a religious man,--a ministerial father and
     three family deacons saw to that, though it doesn't always
     work that way!--Frankly, I do not expect your card to have a
     wide appeal, so I offer you only five dollars.

     A Christmas card, my dear madam, must have a greeting, and
     yours has none. If the pictured room were a real room, and
     some one who had seen or lived in it should recognize it, it
     would attract his eye, but we cannot manufacture cards to
     meet such romantic improbabilities. I am emboldened to ask
     you (because you live in Beulah) if you will not paint the
     outside of some lonely, little New Hampshire cottage, as
     humble as you like, and make me some more verses; something,
     say, about "the folks back home."

                                         Sincerely yours,
                                            REUBEN SMALL.

                                                    BEULAH, N.H.

     DEAR MR. SMALL:--

     I accept your offer of five dollars for my maiden effort in
     Christmas cards with thanks, and will try my hand at
     something more popular. I am not above liking to make a
     "wide appeal," but the subject you propose is rather a
     staggering one, because you accompany it with a phrase
     lacking rhythm, and difficult to rhyme. You will at once
     see, by running through the alphabet, that "roam" is the
     only serviceable rhyme for "_home_," but the union of the
     two suggests jingle or doggerel. I defy any minor poet when
     furnished with such a phrase, to refrain from bursting at
     once into:--

     No matter where you travel, no matter where you roam,
     You'll never dum-di-dum-di-dee
         The folks back home.

                                         Sincerely yours,
                                            REBA LARRABEE.

     P.S. On second thought I believe James Whitcomb Riley could
     do it and overcome the difficulties, but alas! I have not
     his touch!

     DEAR MRS. LARRABEE:--

     We never refuse verses because they are too good for the
     public. Nothing is too good for the public, but the public
     must be the judge of what pleases it.

     "The folks back home" is a phrase that will strike the eye
     and ear of thousands of wandering sons and daughters. They
     will choose that card from the heaped-up masses on the
     counters and send it to every State in the Union. If you
     will glance at your first card you will see that though
     people may read it they will always leave it on the counter.
     I want my cards on counters, by the thousand, but I don't
     intend that they should be left there!

     Make an effort, dear Mrs. Larrabee! I could get "the folks
     back home" done here in the office in half an hour, but I'm
     giving you the chance because you live in Beulah, New
     Hampshire, and because you make beautiful pictures.

                                         Sincerely yours,
                                            REUBEN SMALL.

     DEAR MR. SMALL:--

     I enclose a colored sketch of the outside of the cottage
     whose living-room I used in my first card. I chose it
     because I love the person who lives in it; because it always
     looks beautiful in the snow, and because the tree is so
     picturesque. The fact that it is gray for lack of paint may
     remind a casual wanderer that there is something to do, now
     and then, for the "folks back home." The verse is just as
     bad as I thought it would be. It seems incredible that any
     one should buy it, but ours is a big country and there are
     many kinds of people living in it, so who knows? Why don't
     you accept my picture and then you write the card? I could
     not put my initials on this! They are unknown, to be sure,
     and I should want them to be, if you use it!

                                         Sincerely yours,
                                            REBA LARRABEE.

         Now here's a Christmas greeting
           To the "folks back home."
         It comes to you across the space,
           Dear folks back home!
         I've searched the wide world over,
           But no matter where I roam,
         No friends are like the old friends,
           No folks like those back home!

     DEAR MRS. LARRABEE:--

     I gave you five dollars for the first picture and verses,
     which you, as a writer, regard more highly than I, who am
     merely a manufacturer. Please accept twenty dollars for "The
     Folks Back Home," on which I hope to make up my loss on the
     first card! I insist on signing the despised verse with your
     initials. In case R. L. should later come to mean
     something, you will be glad that a few thousand people have
     seen it.

                                         Sincerely,
                                            REUBEN SMALL.

The Hessian soldier andirons, the portrait over the Boynton mantel,
and even Letty Boynton's cape were identified on the first card,
sooner or later, but it was obvious that Mrs. Larrabee had to have a
picture for her verses and couldn't be supposed to make one up "out of
her head"; though Osh Popham declared it had been done again and again
in other parts of the world. Also it was agreed that, as Letty's face
was not distinguishable, nobody outside of Beulah could recognize her
by her cape; and that anyhow it couldn't make much difference, for if
anybody wanted to spend fifteen cents on a card he would certainly buy
the one about "the folks back home." The popularity of this was
established by the fact that it was selling, not only in Beulah and
Greentown, but in Boston, and in Racine, Wisconsin, and, it was
rumored, even in Chicago. The village milliner in Beulah had disposed
of twenty-seven copies in thirteen days and the minister's wife was
universally conceded to be the most celebrated person in the State of
New Hampshire.

Letty Boynton had an uncomfortable moment when she saw the first card,
but common sense assured her that outside of a handful of neighbors no
one would identify her home surroundings; meantime she was proud of
Reba's financial and artistic triumph in "The Folks Back Home" and
generously glad that she had no share in it.

Twice during the autumn David had broken his silence, but only to
send her a postal from some Western town, telling her that he should
have no regular address for a time; that he was traveling for a
publishing firm and felt ill-adapted to the business. He hoped that
she and the children were well, for he himself was not; etc., etc.

The twins had been photographed by Osh Popham, who was Jack of all
trades and master of many, and a sight of their dimpled charms, curly
heads, and straight little bodies would have gladdened any father's
heart, Letty thought. However, she scorned to win David back by any
such specious means. If he didn't care to know whether his children
were hump-backed, bow-legged, cross-eyed, club-footed, or
feeble-minded, why should she enlighten him? This was her usual frame
of mind, but in these last days of the year how she longed to pop the
bewitching photographs and Reba's Christmas cards into an envelope and
send them to David.

But where? No word at all for weeks and weeks, and then only a postal
from St. Joseph, saying that he had given up his position on account
of poor health. Nothing in all this to keep Christmas on, thought
Letty, and she knitted and crocheted and sewed with extra ardor that
the twins' stockings might be filled with bright things of her own
making.




[Illustration]