III


Letitia Boynton's life had been rather a drab one as seen through
other people's eyes, but it had never seemed so to her till within the
last few years. Her own father had been the village doctor, but of him
she had no memory. Her mother's second marriage to a venerable country
lawyer, John Gilman, had brought a kindly, inefficient stepfather into
the family, a man who speedily became an invalid needing constant
nursing. The birth of David when Letty was three years old, brought a
new interest into the household, and the two children grew to be fast
friends; but when Mrs. Gilman died, and Letty found herself at
eighteen the mistress of the house, the nurse of her aged stepfather,
and the only guardian of a boy of fifteen, life became difficult. More
difficult still it became when the old lawyer died, for he at least
had been a sort of fictitious head of the family and his mere
existence kept David within bounds.

David was a lively, harum-scarum, handsome youth, good at his lessons,
popular with his companions, always in a scrape, into which he was
generally drawn by the minister's son, so the neighbors thought. At
any rate, Dick Larrabee, as David's senior, received the lion's share
of the blame when mischief was abroad. If Parson Larrabee's boy
couldn't behave any better than an unbelieving black-smith's, a
Methodist farmer's, or a Baptist storekeeper's, what was the use of
claiming superior efficacy for the Congregational form of belief?

"Dick's father's never succeeded in bringing him into the church,
though he's worked on him from the time he was knee-high to a toad,"
said Mrs. Popham.

"P'raps his mother kind o' vaccinated him with religion 'stid o'
leavin' him to take it the natural way, as the ol' sayin' is," was her
husband's response. "The first Mis' Larrabee was as good as gold, but
she may have overdone the trick a little mite, mebbe; and what's more,
I kind o' suspicion the parson thinks so himself. He ain't never been
quite the same sence Dick left home, 'cept in preaching'; an' I tell
you, Maria, his high-water mark there is higher 'n ever. Abel Dunn o'
Boston walked home from meetin' with me Thanksgivin', an', says he,
takin' off his hat an' moppin' his forehead, 'Osh,' says he, 'does
your minister preach like that every Sunday?' 'No,' says I, 'he don't.
If he did we couldn't stan' it! He preaches like that about once a
month, an' we don't care what he says the rest o' the time.'"

"Well, so far as boys are concerned, preachin' ain't so reliable, for
behavin' purposes, as a good young alder switch," was the opinion of
Mrs. Popham, her children being of the comatose kind, whose minds had
never been illuminated by the dazzling idea of disobedience.

"Land sakes, Maria! There ain't alders enough on the river-bank to
switch religion into a boy like Dick Larrabee. It's got to come like
a thief in the night, as the ol' sayin' is, but I guess I don't mean
thief, I guess I mean star: it's got to come kind o' like a star in a
dark night. If the whole village, 'generate an' onregenerate, hadn't
'a' kep' on naggin' an' hectorin' an' criticizin' them two boys, Dick
an' Dave,--carryin' tales an' multiplyin' of 'em by two, '_ong root_'
as the ol' sayin' is,--I dare say they'd 'a' both been here yet; 'stid
o' roamin' roun' the earth seekin' whom they may devour."

There was considerable truth in Ossian Popham's remark, as Letty could
have testified; for the conduct of the Boynton-Gilman household, as
well as that of the minister, had been continually under inspection
and discussion.

Nothing could remain long hidden in Beulah. Nobody spied, nobody
pried, nobody listened at doors or windows, nobody owned a microscope,
nobody took any particular notice of events, or if they did they
preserved an attitude of profound indifference while doing it,--yet
everything was known sooner or later. The amount of the fish and meat
bill, the precise extent of credit, the number of letters in the post,
the amount of fuel burned, the number of absences from church and
prayer-meeting, the calls or visits made and received, the hours of
arrival or departure, the source of all incomes,--these details were
the common property of the village. It even took cognizance of more
subtle things; for it observed and recorded the fluctuations of all
love affairs, and the fluctuations also in the religious experiences
of various persons not always in spiritual equilibrium; for the soul
was an object of scrutiny in Beulah, as well as mind, body, and
estate.

Letty Boynton used to feel that nothing was exclusively her own; that
she belonged to Beulah part and parcel; but Dick Larrabee was far more
restive under the village espionage than were she and David.

It was natural that David should want to leave Beulah and make his way
in the world, and his sister did not oppose it. Dick's circumstances
were different. He had inherited a small house and farm from his
mother, had enjoyed a college education, and had been offered a share
in a good business in a city twelve miles away. He left Beulah because
he hated it. He left because he could not endure his father's gentle
remonstrances or the bewilderment in his stepmother's eyes. She was a
newcomer in the household and her glance seemed to say: "Why on earth
do you behave so badly to your father when you're such a delightful
chap?" He left because Deacon Todd had prayed for him publicly at a
Christian Endeavor meeting; because Mrs. Popham had circulated a
wholly baseless scandal about him; and finally because in his young
misery the only being who could have comforted him by joining her
hapless fortunes to his had refused to do so. He didn't know why. He
had always counted on Letty when the time should come to speak the
word. He had shown his heart in everything but words; what more did a
girl want? Of course, if any one preferred a purely fantastic duty to
a man's love, and allowed a scapegrace brother to foist two red-faced,
squalling babies on her, there was nothing to be said. So, in this
frame of mind he had had one flaming, passionate, wrong-headed scene
with his father, and strode out of Beulah with dramatic gestures of
shaking its dust off his feet. His father, roused for once from his
lifelong patience, had been rather terrible in that last scene; so
terrible that he had never forgiven himself, or really believed
himself fully forgiven by God, though his son had alienated half the
village and nearly rent the parish in twain by his conduct.

As for Letty, she held her peace. She could only hope that the
minister and his wife suspected nothing, and she was sure of Beulah's
point of view. That a girl would never give up a suitor, if she had
any hope of tying him to her for life, was a popular form of belief in
the community; and strangely enough it was chiefly the women, not the
men, who made it current. Now and then a soft-hearted and chivalrous
male would observe indulgently of some village beauty, "I shouldn't
wonder a mite if she could 'a' had Bill for the askin'"; but this
opinion would be met by such a chorus of feminine incredulity that its
author generally withdrew it as unsound and untenable.

It was then, when Dick had gone away, that the days had grown drab and
long, but the twins kept Letty's inexperienced hands busy, though in
the first year she had the help of old Miss Clarissa Perry, a
childless expert in the bringing-up of babies.

The friendship of Reba Larrabee, so bright and cheery and
comprehending, was a never-ending solace. There was nothing of the
martyr about Letty. She was not wholly resigned to her lot, and to
tell the truth she did not intend to be, for a good many years yet.

"I'm not a minister, but I'm the wife of a minister, which is the next
best thing," Mrs. Larrabee used to say. "I tell you, Letty, there's no
use in human creatures being resigned till their bodies are fairly
worn out with fighting. When you can't think of another mortal thing
to do, be resigned; but I'm convinced that the Lord is ashamed of us
when we fold our hands too soon!"

"You were born courageous, Reba!" And Letty would look admiringly at
the rosy cheeks and bright eyes of her friend.

"My blood circulates freely; that helps me a lot. Everybody's blood
circulates in Racine, Wisconsin."--And the minister's wife laughed
genially. "Yours, hereabouts, freezes up in your six months of cold
weather, and when it begins to thaw out the snow is ready to fall
again. That sort of thing induces depression, although no mere climate
would account for Mrs. Popham.--Ossian said to Luther the other day:
'Maria ain't hardly to blame, parson. She come from a gloomy stock.
The Ladds was all gloomy, root and branch. They say that the Ladd
babies was always discouraged two days after they was born.'"

The cause of Letty's chief heartache, the one that she could reveal to
nobody, was that her brother should leave her nowadays so completely
to her own resources. She recalled the time when he came home from
Boston, pale, haggard, ashamed, and told her of his marriage, months
before. She could read in his lack-lustre eyes, and hear in his
voice, the absence of love, the fear of the future. That was bad
enough, but presently he said: "Letty, there's more to tell. I've no
money, and no place to put my wife, but there's a child coming. Can I
bring her here till--afterwards? You won't like her, but she's so
ailing and despondent just now that I think she'll behave herself, and
I'll take her away as soon as she's able to travel. She would never
stay here in the country, anyway; you couldn't hire her to do it."

She came: black-haired, sullen-faced Eva, with a vulgar beauty of her
own, much damaged by bad temper, discontent, and illness. Oh, those
terrible weeks for Letty, hiding her own misery, putting on a brave
face with the neighbors, keeping the unwelcome sister-in-law in the
background.

It was bitterly cold, and Eva raged against the climate, the house,
the lack of a servant, the absence of gayety, and above all at the
prospect of motherhood. Her resentment against David, for some reason
unknown to Letty, was deep and profound and she made no secret of it;
until the outraged Letty, goaded into speech one day, said: "Listen,
Eva! David brought you here because his sister's house was the proper
place for you just now. I don't know why you married each other, but
you did, and it's evidently a failure. I'm going to stand by David and
see you through this trouble, but while you're under my roof you'll
have to speak respectfully of my brother; not so much because he's my
brother, but because he's your husband and the father of the child
that's coming:--do you understand?"

Letty had a good deal of red in her bronze hair and her brown eyes
were as capable of flashing fire as Eva's black ones; so the girl not
only refrained from venting her spleen upon the absent David, but
ceased to talk altogether, and the gloom in the house was as black as
if Mrs. Popham and all her despondent ancestors were living under its
roof.

The good doctor called often and did his best, shrugging his shoulders
and lifting his eyebrows as he said: "Let her work out her own
salvation. I doubt if she can, but we'll give her the chance. If the
problem can be solved, the child will do it."




[Illustration]