CHAPTER VI.

LONG AGO.


THE old Hawaiians, who in those far-away times called themselves
Savaiians, loaded their boats with provisions and other needed supplies.
They set sail with their wives and children in hope of soon finding a
pleasant home in some new island. Their voyage was longer, however, than
they expected. Storms arose, and many of the poor little children grew
sick and died. But the boats, which were hardly more than large canoes
lashed together, rode safely onward. After many days the people saw the
shores of the Hawaiian Islands ahead of them.

How glad they were to stand on dry land once more! They found a
sheltered valley where they soon made themselves comfortable. They had
brought with them some chickens, two or three pigs and dogs, besides the
seeds of the breadfruit, and the kou trees. They found the taro plant
already growing there. They had made poi from it in their old home, so
they knew how to use it. Besides this, they found the kapa-tree. From
its bark they could make new garments to take the place of their
sea-worn clothing.

They were very happy. Children were born in this new and beautiful land.
Seeds were planted; more pigs and chickens were raised. It was the
Golden Age of Hawaii, for there were peace and plenty.

Even the Brownies helped the settlers, and often worked wonders in the
land. At least, this is what Auwae's father said, and I think he
believed in these queer little beings.

When he mentioned the Brownies,--Menehunes he called them,--Auwae's
eyes grew large with delight. She loved to hear about this race of
dwarfs who were said to have built immense fish-ponds and sea-wells.
Why, if you yourself, should doubt there were such beings, Auwae could
point to their large stone ruins not far from her home. She would say:

"Do you suppose any living people could set such great stones in place?
Surely not! The Brownies are the only ones having strength enough to do
work like that. Why, they are able to pass big stones from one to
another for miles."

Her father tells her that the secret of the Brownies' power is that they
_work together_ and work till their work is done. When human people
sleep they are busy, but if mortals walk abroad at such times the
Brownies make themselves invisible. Those were certainly wonderful times
when the spirits of the earth worked for men, and did such mighty deeds
in Hawaii.

But an end soon came to this joy and comfort, for men began to quarrel
and have wars against each other. Then the Brownies withdrew their aid,
and left them to themselves. Sickness fell upon the Hawaiians. There
were many rulers, each one trying to gain all the power possible. The
rich grew richer, and the poor poorer. Wicked priests, as well as the
chiefs and masters, held the people in fear. It was a sad, sad time. The
"chiefesses" (for there were women rulers) were no better than the men.

At last a child was born in Hawaii, who was unusually strong and wise.
He grew up and became a great chief. His name was Kamehameha. That word
means "The Lonely One." He was very ambitious. He looked over the island
of Hawaii, and said to himself:

"I will make myself king of this whole land. I will bring the people
more closely together. I will change many of the customs which are bad
and harmful."

He kept his word. He rallied his own men around him, and was soon ruler
of the entire island. But still he was not satisfied. He looked across
the sea to other islands, and said:

"I will be ruler over all these, too. My kingdom shall be a powerful
one."

He sailed with his troops in his strong war-canoes, and soon landed on
the island of Maui, not far from Hawaii.

The king of that island had been warned of the coming of the enemy. He
was already marching down a narrow pass between the mountains to meet
The Lonely One and his army.

Kamehameha did not waste a moment. He rushed up the pass, his men
following him in single file, and there, in a narrow pathway at least a
thousand feet above a deep abyss, the two armies met. As each one of the
Hawaiian soldiers stepped upward, he met and grappled with one of the
enemy. One or the other was sure to be hurled downward over the
precipice, and meet death below, if he were not already killed on the
narrow pathway.

It was a terrible battle. When night came the army of Maui was no more,
and Kamehameha was ruler of that island.

He was suddenly called back to his own home, for news came that a rebel
leader in Hawaii had risen against him. This leader encamped with his
men near the volcano Kilauea. As the great Kamehameha advanced to meet
them an earthquake shook the land; a violent storm of cinders and sand
rose out of the crater to a great height, and then fell down over the
mountainside.

When the men were able to advance once more it was found that a large
part of the rebel army had been killed by the eruption. At this the
people exclaimed:

"Surely the Goddess Pele was angry at the rebel chief. She chose this
way to show her favour toward Kamehameha."

After this there were other troubles, but The Lonely One grew more and
more powerful. At last he became the ruler of all the islands. He did
with them as he had promised himself, and the people were united and
happy as long as he lived.