CHAPTER II.

     IF THE LION EVER WEAR THE FOX'S HIDE, STILL HE WEARS IT AS THE LION.

When Darrell was alone with Lionel and Alban Morley, the calm with which
he had before startled them vanished.  He poured out his thanks with deep
emotion.  "Forgive me; not in the presence of a servant could I say, 'You
have saved me from an unnatural strife, and my daaghter's husband from a
murderer's end.'  But by what wondrous mercy did you learn my danger?
Were you sent to my aid?"

Alban briefly explained.  "You may judge," he said in conclusion, "how
great was our anxiety, when, following the instructions of our guide,
while our driver rang his alarum at the front portals, we made our
entrance into yon ribs of stone, found the doors already opened, and
feared we might be too late.  But, meanwhile, the poor woman waits
without in the carriage that brought us from the station.  I must go
and relieve her mind."

"And bring her hither," cried Darrell, "to receive my gratitude.  Stay,
Alban; while you leave me with her, you will speak aside to Mills; tell
him that you heard there was an attempt to be made on the house, and came
to frustrate it, but that your fears were exaggerated; the man was more
a half-insane mendicant than a robber.  Be sure, at least, that his
identity with Losely be not surmised, and bid Mills treat the affair
lightly.  Public men are exposed, you know, to assaults from crackbrained
enthusiasts; or stay--I once was a lawyer, and" (continued Darrell, whose
irony had become so integral an attribute of his mind as to be proof
against all trial) "there are men so out of their wits as to fancy a
lawyer has ruined them!  Lionel, tell poor Dick Fairthorn to come to me."
When the musician entered, Darrell whispered to him: "Go back to your
room--open your casement--step out on to the parapet--you will see
something white; it is a scrap of paper wrapped round my old armorial
seal.  Bring it to me just as it is, Dick.  That poor young Lionel, we
must keep him here a day or two; mind, no prickles for him, Dick."