CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE BEST THINGS.

  A rose which falleth from the hand, which fadeth in the breast,
  Until in grieving for the worst, we learn what is the best.

  Mrs Browning.

Everything went on quite smoothly until the day fixed for the picnic
came.  Aunt Sarah gave no hint of any objection; the weather was
gloriously hot and fine; Anna's new white dress was very pretty--there
was nothing wanting to her long-desired enjoyment.

She stood amongst the nodding roses in the porch, waiting for the
Palmers to call for her in their carriage, on the way to Alderbury.
Aunt Sarah was, perhaps, to drive over and join the party later.  Anna
had dismissed all troublesome thoughts.  She felt sure she was going to
be very happy, and that nothing unlucky would happen to spoil her
pleasure.  She was in gay spirits, as she fastened a bunch of the little
cluster-roses in her dress.  Isabel had once told her that she looked
very pretty in white, and she was glad to feel that she suited the
beauty of the bright summer day.

"Anna!" said Mrs Forrest's voice from the hall within.

Anna turned.  The hall looked dark and shadowy after the sunshine, but
it was easy to see that there was vexation on her aunt's face as she
studied the letter in her hand.

"I have just had a note from Dr Hunt," she said.  "Mr Goodwin, your
grandfather, is not very well."

"What is the matter?" asked Anna.

She left the porch and went up to her aunt's side.

"Why, I can't quite make out.  Dr Hunt talks of fever, but says there
is nothing infectious.  Brought on by over-exertion in the heat, he
thinks.  He says you may safely go to see him--"

There was a pause.  Mrs Forrest and Anna looked at each other: each
waited for the other to speak.  Must I give up the picnic after all?
thought Anna.

"I don't gather that it's anything serious," said Mrs Forrest at
length.  "I think the best plan will be for me to go over to Dornton,
after you've started, and see Dr Hunt.  Then, if there's really no
danger of infection, you can go there early to-morrow," She looked
inquiringly at Anna, as though half-expecting her to make some other
suggestion.  The sound of wheels on the gravel, and the tramp of horses,
told that the Palmers were approaching: the wagonette, full of gay young
people, drove up to the porch.

"Are you ready, Anna?" called out Isabel's voice.

"Will that satisfy you?" said Mrs Forrest; "you must decide now."

"We're late, Anna," said Isabel again, "why don't you come?"

Anna hesitated.  She looked out at the bright sunshine, where her
companions called her to gaiety and pleasure, and then at the letter in
her aunt's hand.

"Here's your cloak, Miss Anna," said the maid waiting at the door.

In another moment, it seemed almost without any will of her own, she was
squeezed into the carriage amongst her laughing companions, had waved a
farewell to Mrs Forrest standing smiling in the porch, and was whirled
away to the picnic.

The hours of the sunny day, filled with delight for Anna amongst the
pleasant woods of Alderbury, did not pass so quickly at Number 4 Back
Row.  The Professor was ill.  He had had a slight feverish attack to
begin with, which passed off, and seemed of no importance, but it had
left him in a state of nervous weakness and prostration, at which Dr
Hunt looked grave.  Mr Goodwin must have been over-exerting himself for
some time past, he declared, and this breakdown was the result.  It
would probably be some time before he could do any work.  Perfect rest,
and freedom from all care and agitation, were the only remedies.

"Don't let him know, Delia," he said to his daughter as he left the
house, "that he's likely to be laid up long.  Keep him as quiet and
cheerful as possible.  I'll send a line to Mrs Forrest, and let her
know that his grandchild may be with him as much as she likes."

Delia prepared to spend the rest of the day with her old friend, and
having persuaded him to lie down on the hard little couch, and made him
as comfortable as she could with pillows, she sat down in the window
with her sewing.  From here she could watch the little gate, and prevent
any one from entering too suddenly.  Of course Anna would come soon.
The Professor was very quiet, but she thought he turned his eyes towards
the door now and then, as though looking for some one.  Was it Anna?  At
last she was thankful to see him fall into a doze which lasted some
while, and she was just thinking for the hundredth time that Anna _must_
come now, when she was startled by his voice:

"Prissy," it said, quite clearly.

Delia went up to the sofa.  Mr Goodwin gazed at her for a moment
without recognition.

"You've had a nice sleep, Professor," she said, smiling, "and now you
are going to have some tea with me."

But in spite of his sleep, the Professor's face looked anxious, and he
hardly tasted the tea which Delia prepared.  As she took his cup, he
said wistfully:

"Did Dr Hunt write to Mrs Forrest?"

Delia nodded.

"Did--did Anna happen to come while I was asleep?" was his next
question.

"She's not been yet," said Delia, "but they may not have had the letter
till late.  She will come soon."

"I should like to see her," said the Professor.

Why did not Anna come?  As the weary hours went by, and the sun got
lower and lower, he became very restless, looked first at his watch and
then at the door, and no longer tried to conceal how much he wanted to
see his grandchild.  Delia tried in vain to divert his mind by reading
his favourite books, but it was evident that he was not listening to
her.  He was listening for the click of the gate, and the footsteps
outside.  Every subject in which she tried to interest him came back to
the same thing, Anna, and Anna's doings.  Delia could not help one throb
of jealous pain, as she recognised how powerless she was to take her
place, a place she seemed to value so little.  But it was only for one
moment; the next she put all thought of herself aside.  Anna belonged to
the dearest memories of the Professor's life.  She had a place in his
heart which would always be kept for her, whatever she had done or left
undone.  To bring peace and comfort into his face again, Delia would
have been willing at that moment to give up her own place in his
affections entirely.  If only Anna would come!

"I suppose it's too late to expect her now, my dear, isn't it?" said the
patient voice again.

Delia could not bear it any longer.

"I think," she said, as cheerfully as she could, "if you don't mind
being alone a little while, I'll just run over to Waverley.  Mrs
Cooper's here, if you want anything, you know."

"Will you really?" said the Professor, with hope in his voice.

"There's perhaps been some mistake about that letter," said Delia.
"You'd like to see Anna to-night, wouldn't you?"

"Well, I _should_," said Mr Goodwin.  "It's very absurd, I know, but I
had such a strange dream just now about her and Prissy, and I can't get
it out of my head.  I suppose being not quite up to the mark makes one
unreasonable, but I really don't think I could sleep without seeing her.
It's very good of you to go, my dear."

"I'll be back in no time, and bring her with me," said Delia.

She spoke with confidence, but half-way across the fields she stopped
her rapid pace, checked by a sudden thought--the picnic!

In her anxiety she had forgotten it.  Anna might have started before Dr
Hunt's note got to Waverley.  Even then, though, she said to herself,
she must be home by now.  So she ran on again, and half an hour later
she was on her way back over the darkening fields--without Anna.  She
had gone to the picnic, and she knew the Professor was ill!  Once Delia
would have felt angry; now there was only room in her heart for one
thought: "He will be disappointed, and he will not sleep to-night."

The church clock struck nine as she entered the High Street in Dornton,
and the same sound fell faintly on Anna's ears on her way back from
Alderbury.  The picnic had been over long ago, but, shortly after the
party started to return, one of the horses lost a shoe; the carriage in
which Anna was had to proceed at a slow walk for the rest of the
distance, and it would be very late before she could reach Waverley.

No accident, however, could damp her spirits, or those of her
companions.  It was all turned into amusement and fun.  The whole day
had been more delightful than any Anna had known.  It was over now, that
delightful day, and she gave a little sigh of regret to think that she
was at the end of it instead of at the beginning.  The one shadow which
had fallen across the brightness of it, had been cast by the substantial
figure of Mrs Winn, whom she had seen in the distance now and then.
Once she had noticed her in earnest conversation with Mrs Palmer, and
thought that they had both looked in her direction, but it had been easy
to avoid contact with her amongst so many people.  It had not spoiled
her enjoyment then; but now, her excitement a little cooled down,
unpleasant thoughts began to make themselves heard.

Here was the Rectory at last!  Anna burst into the drawing-room, her
fair hair falling in confusion over her shoulders, a large bundle of
foxgloves in her arms, her cheeks bright with the cool night breeze.

"Oh, aunt!" she exclaimed, "we've had such a lovely, lovely day.  Why
didn't you come?"

"You're very late, my dear Anna," said Mrs Forrest, gravely.  "I
expected you more than an hour ago."

Anna explained the reason of her delay.

"Alderbury is the most perfect place," she repeated.  "Why didn't you
come?"

"It's very unlucky that you should be late," said Mrs Forrest.  "Delia
has been over asking for you."

Anna's face fell.  "Oh!" she exclaimed.  "My grandfather!  Is he worse?"

"I don't think so.  And from what I learned from Dr Hunt, he is not at
all seriously ill.  But he was restless, Delia said, and wanted to see
you to-night."

"To see me," said Anna.  She let her flowers fall in a heap on the
ground.  "Oh, Aunt Sarah, I wish I had not gone to the picnic!"

"Now, my dear Anna, that is foolish.  You shall go to Dornton early
to-morrow, and no doubt you will find Mr Goodwin better.  Remember that
there is no cause for anxiety, and though the accident of your being
late was very unfortunate, it could not be avoided."

Aunt Sarah's composed words were reassuring.  Probably her grandfather
was not very ill, Anna thought; but oh, why had she gone to the picnic,
and what would Delia say?

These last words were in her mind again next morning, as she arrived at
Number 4 Back Row, and stood waiting to be let in.  The little house
looked very sad and silent, as though it knew its master was ill.
Presently the door opened a very little way, and the long, mournful face
of Mrs Cooper appeared.  When she saw who it was she put her finger on
her lip, and then said in a loud, hoarse whisper, "I'll call Miss
Delia."

Anna was left outside.  She felt frightened.  Why did Mrs Cooper look
so grave?  Perhaps grandfather was very ill after all!

It seemed ages before the door opened again, and when it did, it was
Delia who stood there.  She did not look at all angry, but her face was
very sad.

"He has had a very bad night," she whispered, "but now he is sleeping.
He must not be disturbed.  You had better come later."

That was all.  The door was gently shut again, and Anna stood outside.
As she turned away, her eyes filled with tears.  Yesterday her
grandfather had wanted her, and she had not gone--to-day the door was
shut.  He must be very ill, she felt sure, whatever Aunt Sarah might
say.  His kind, gentle face came before her, as she made her way along--
always kind, never with any reproach in it.  How could she have gone to
the picnic, and left him to ask for her in vain?

As she reached the place where the pony-cart waited for her, Isabel
Palmer came out of a shop.  She looked at her with a sort of cold
surprise.

"Oh, Anna," she said, "how is Mr Goodwin?  We only heard yesterday he
was ill.  I was going to his house to ask after him."

"Dr Hunt says there is no cause for anxiety," said Anna, repeating the
sentence she had so often heard from Aunt Sarah.

"It was Mrs Winn who told mother he was ill," continued Isabel,
observing Anna's downcast face curiously, "and--she said another thing
which surprised us all very much.  Why didn't you tell us long ago that
Mr Goodwin is your grandfather?"

Anna was silent.

"We can't understand it at all," continued Isabel.  "Mother says it
might have caused great unpleasantness.  She's quite vexed."

She waited a moment with her eyes fixed on Anna, and then said, with a
little toss of her head:

"Well--good-bye.  I suppose we shan't meet again before we go to
Scotland.  Mother has written to tell Mrs Forrest that we're not going
on with lessons."

They parted with a careless shake of the hands, and Anna was driven away
in the pony-cart.  Her friendship with Isabel, her pleasant visits to
Pynes, were over now.  She was humbled and disgraced before every one,
and Delia would know it too.  It would have been a wounding thought
once, but now there was no room in her heart for any feeling but dread
of what might happen to Mr Goodwin.

"Oh, Aunt Sarah," she cried, when she reached Waverley, and found her
aunt in the garden, "I'm sure my grandfather is worse--I'm sure he's
very ill.  I did not see him."

Mrs Forrest was tying up a rebellious creeper, which wished to climb in
its own way instead of hers.  She finished binding down one of the
unruly tendrils before she turned to look at her niece.  Anna was
flushed.  Her eyelids were red and swollen.

"Why didn't you see him?" she asked.  "Does Dr Hunt think him worse?"

"I don't know," said Anna.  "I only saw Delia for a minute.  He was
asleep.  I am to go again.  Oh, Aunt Sarah," with a burst of sobs, "I do
wish I had not gone to the picnic.  I wish I had behaved better to my
grandfather.  I wish--"

Mrs Forrest laid her hand kindly on Anna's shoulder.

"My dear," she said, "you distress yourself without reason.  We can rely
on Dr Hunt's opinion that your grandfather only needs rest.  Sleep is
the very best thing for him.  When you go this evening, you will see how
foolish you have been.  Meanwhile, try to exercise some self-control;
occupy yourself, and the time will soon pass."

She turned to her gardening again, and Anna wandered off alone.  Aunt
Sarah's calm words had no comfort in them.  Delia's severest rebuke,
even Mrs Winn's plain speech, would have been better.  She went
restlessly up to her bedroom, seeking she hardly knew what.  Her eye
fell on the little brown case, long unopened, which held her mother's
portrait.  Words, long unthought of, came back to her as she looked at
it.

"If you are half as good and beautiful," her father had said; and on the
same day what had been Miss Milverton's last warning?  "Try to value the
best things."

"Oh," cried Anna to herself as she looked at the pure, truthful eyes of
the picture, "if I only could begin again!  But now it's all got so
wrong, it can never, never be put right!"

After a while, she went into the garden again, and avoiding Mrs
Forrest, crossed the little foot-bridge leading into the field, and sat
down on the gate.  The chimneys of Leas Farm in the distance made her
think of Daisy, and the old days when they had first met, and she had
been so full of good resolves.  Daisy, and the good resolves, and Delia
too, seemed all to have vanished together.  She had no friends now.
Every one had deserted her, and she had deserved it!

She was sitting during those reflections with her face buried in her
hands, and presently was startled by the sound of a little voice behind
her.

"What's the matter?" it said.

It was Daisy Oswald, who had come through the garden, and now stood on
the bridge close to her, a basket of eggs in her hand, and her childish,
freckled face full of wonder and sympathy.

Generally, Anna would have been ashamed to be seen in distress, and
would have tried to hide it, but now she was too miserable to mind
anything.  She hid her face in her hands again, without answering
Daisy's question.

"Has some one been cross?" inquired Daisy at last.

Anna shook her head.  Her heart ached for sympathy even from Daisy,
though she could not speak to her, and she hoped she would not go away
just yet.

"Have you hurt yourself?" proceeded Daisy.

Again the same sign.

"Have you done something naughty?  I did something very naughty once."

Seeing that Anna did not shake her head this time, she added, in her
condescending little tone:

"If you like, I'll come and sit beside you, and tell you all about it."

She put her basket of eggs very carefully on the ground, and placed
herself comfortably by Anna's side.

"It was a very naughty thing _I_ did," she began, in a voice of some
enjoyment, "worse than yours, I expect.  It was a year ago, and one of
our geese was sitting, and mother said she wasn't to be meddled with
nohow.  And the white Cochin-china hen was sitting too, and"--Daisy
paused to give full weight to the importance of the crime, and opened
her eyes very wide, "and--I changed 'em!  I carried the goose and put
her on the hen's nest, and she forsook it, and the hen forsook hers, and
the eggs were all addled!  Mother _was_ angry!  She said it wasn't the
eggs she minded so much as the disobedience.  Was yours worse than
that?"

"Much, much worse," murmured Anna.

Daisy made a click with her tongue to express how shocked she felt at
this idea.

"Have you said you're sorry, and you won't do it any more?" she asked.
"When you're sorry, people are kind."

"I don't deserve that they should be kind," said Anna, looking up
mournfully at her little adviser.

"Father and mother were kind afterwards," said Daisy.  "I had to be
punished though.  I didn't have eggs for breakfast for a whole month
after I changed the goose.  I like eggs for breakfast," she added,
thoughtfully.  Then glancing at her basket, as she got down from the
gate, "Mother sent those to Mrs Forrest.  I came through the garden to
find you, but I'm going back over the field.  You haven't been to see
Star for ever so long.  She's growing a real beauty."

Long after Daisy was out of sight her simple words lingered in Anna's
mind.  They had made her feel less miserable, though nothing was
altered.  "When you're sorry, people are kind," she repeated.  If her
grandfather knew the very worst, if he knew that she had actually been
ashamed of him, would he possibly forgive her? would he ever look kindly
at her again?  Anna sat up and dried her tears.  She lifted her head
with a sudden resolve.  "I will tell him," she said to herself, "every
bit about it, from the very beginning, and then I must bear whatever he
says, and whatever Delia says."

It was easy to make this brave resolve, with no one to hear it but the
quiet cows feeding in the field, but when the evening came, and she
stood for the second time at Number 4 Back Row, her heart beat quickly
with fear.  When she thought of her grandfather's kind face her courage
rose a little, but when she thought of what she had to tell him, it fell
so low that she was almost inclined to run away.  The door opened, but
this time Mrs Cooper did not leave her outside.  She flung open the
door of the sitting-room with her other hand, and said in a loud voice,
"Miss Forrest, sir."

Anna entered, half afraid as to what she should see, for she had made up
her mind that her grandfather was really very ill.  To her relief, the
Professor and his shabby little room looked unaltered.  He was sitting
in his arm-chair by the window, tired and worn, as she had often found
him before, after one of his long walks, and held out his kind hand to
welcome her as usual.

"Oh my dear Anna," he said, "you've come to see me.  That's right.  Come
and sit here."

There was a chair close to him, and as she took it, Anna noticed a piece
of half-finished knitting on the table, which she knew belonged to
Delia.  "If Delia comes in," she thought to herself, "I _can't_ do it."

"Are you better, grandfather?" she managed to ask, in a very subdued
voice.

"Oh, I'm getting on splendidly!" he answered, "with such a good nurse,
and so much care and attention, I shall soon be better than ever I was
before."

There was no mistaking the expression in his face as he turned it
towards her.  Not only welcome and kindness, but love, shone from it
brightly.  In the midst of her confusion Anna wondered how it was that
she had never felt so sure of her grandfather's affection before.  And
now, perhaps, she was to lose it.

"You can't think how wonderfully kind every one is," he continued.  "I
really might almost think myself an important person in Dornton.  They
send messages and presents, and are ready to do anything to help me.
Mr Hurst came in just now to tell me that he has arranged to fill my
place as organist for a whole month, so that I may have a rest.  They're
very nice, good people in Dornton.  That kind Mrs Winn offered to come
and read to me, and then Delia is like another grand-daughter, you
know."

Anna's heart was full as he chatted on.  Must she tell him?  Might she
not put it off a little?

"And so you went to a picnic yesterday?" he went on, as she sat silently
by him.  "Was it very pleasant?  Let me see, did the sun shine?  You
must tell me all about it.  I am to be an idle man now, you know, and
shall want every one to amuse me with gossip."

"Grandfather," cried Anna, with a sudden burst of courage, "I want to
tell you--I've done something very wrong."

The Professor turned his gentle glance upon her.

"We all have to say that, my dear," he answered, "very often.  But I'm
sure you're sorry for it, whatever it is."

"It's something very bad," murmured Anna, "Delia knows.  She won't
forgive me, I know, but I thought perhaps you would."

"Is it to Delia you have done wrong?" asked Mr Goodwin.

"No.  To you," replied Anna, gaining courage as she went on, "I--"

The Professor stroked her fair hair gently.  It was just the same colour
as Prissy's, he thought.

"Then I don't want to hear any more, my dear," he said, "for I know all
about it already."

The relief was so great, after the effort of speaking, that Anna burst
into tears, but they were tears full of comfort, and had no bitterness
in them.

"Oh, grandfather," she sobbed, "you _are_ good.  Better than any one.  I
will never, never--"

"Hush, my dear, hush," said the Professor, patting her hand gently, and
trying to console her by all the means in his power.

"I wonder where Delia is!" he said at last, finding that his efforts
were useless.

Anna sat up straight in her chair at the name, and dried her tears.  She
dreaded seeing Delia, but it must be faced.

"She was here the moment before you came in," he continued.  "Call her,
my dear."

It was not possible to be very far off in Mr Goodwin's house, and
Delia's voice answered from the kitchen, when Anna opened the door and
called her.  A few minutes afterwards she came into the room carrying a
tray full of tea-things; her quick glance rested first on Anna's
tear-stained face, and then on the Professor.

"Anna and I have had a nice talk, my dear Delia," he said, with an
appealing look, "and now we should all like some tea."

Delia understood the look.  She put down her tray, went promptly up to
Anna, and kissed her:

"Come and help me to get the tea ready," she said; "it's quite time the
Professor had something to eat."

So Anna was forgiven, and it was in this way that, during her visit to
Waverley, she began dimly to see what the best things are, and to see it
through sorrow and failure.  It was a lesson she had to go on learning,
like the rest of us, all through her life--not an easy lesson, or one to
be quickly known.  Sometimes we put it from us impatiently, and choose
something which looks more enticing, and not so dull, and for a time we
go on our way gaily--and then, a sorrow, or perhaps a sin, brings home
to us that everything is worthless compared to Love, Truth, and
Faithfulness to Duty, and that if we have been false to them, there is
no comfort anywhere until we return to serve them with tears of
repentance.