CHAPTER I


For several days after the scene in which Mr. Malkin unconsciously
played an important part, Marcella seemed to be ill. She appeared at
meals, but neither ate nor conversed. Christian had never known her so
sullen and nervously irritable; he did not venture to utter Peak's
name. Upon seclusion followed restless activity. Marcella was rarely at
home between breakfast and dinner-time, and her brother learnt with
satisfaction that she went much among her acquaintances. Late one
evening, when he had just returned from he knew not where, Christian
tried to put an end to the unnatural constraint between them. After
talking cheerfully for a few minutes, he risked the question:

'Have you seen anything of the Warricombes?'

She replied with a cold negative.

'Nor heard anything?'

'No. Have you?'

'Nothing at all. I have seen Earwaker. Malkin had told him about what
happened here the other day.'

'Of course.'

'But he had no news.--Of Peak, I mean.'

Marcella smiled, as if the situation amused her; but she would not
discuss it. Christian began to hope that she was training herself to a
wholesome indifference.

A month of the new year went by, and Peak seemed to be forgotten.
Marcella had returned to her studious habits, was fenced around with
books, seldom left the house. Another month and the brother and sister
were living very much in the old way, seeing few people, conversing
only of intellectual things. But Christian concealed an expectation
which enabled him to pass hours of retirement in the completest
idleness. Since the death of her husband, Mrs. Palmer had been living
abroad. Before the end of March, as he had been careful to discover,
she would be back in London, at the house in Sussex Square. By that
time he might venture, without indelicacy, to call upon her. And after
the first interview----

The day came, when, ill with agitation, he set forth to pay this call.
For two or three nights he had scarcely closed his eyes; he looked
ghastly. The weather was execrable, and on that very account he made
choice of this afternoon, hoping that he might find his widowed Laura
alone. Between ringing the bell and the opening of the door, he could
hardly support himself. He asked for Mrs. Palmer in a gasping voice
which caused the servant to look at him with surprise.

The lady was at home. At the drawing-room door, before his name could
be announced, he caught the unwelcome sound of voices in lively
conversation. It seemed to him that a score of persons were assembled.
In reality there were six, three of them callers.

Mrs. Palmer met him with the friendliest welcome. A stranger would have
thought her pretty, but by no means impressive. She was short, anything
but meagre, fair-haired, brisk of movement, idly vivacious in look and
tone. The mourning she wore imposed no restraint upon her humour, which
at present was not far from gay.

'Is it really Mr. Moxey?' she exclaimed. 'Why, I had all but forgotten
you, and positively it is your own fault! It must be a year or more
since you came to see me. No? Eight months?--But I have been through so
much trouble, you know.' She sighed mechanically. 'I thought of you one
day at Bordighera, when we were looking at some funny little
sea-creatures--the kind of thing you used to know all about. How is
your sister?'

A chill struck upon his heart. Assuredly he had no wish to find
Constance sunk in the semblance of dolour; such hypocrisy would have
pained him. But her sprightliness was a shock. Though months had passed
since Mr. Palmer's decease, a decent gravity would more have become her
condition. He could reply only in broken phrases, and it was a relief
to him when the widow, as if tiring of his awkwardness, turned her
attention elsewhere.

He was at length able to survey the company. Two ladies in mourning he
faintly recognised, the one a sister of Mr. Palmer's, comely but of
dull aspect; the other a niece, whose laugh was too frequent even had
it been more musical, and who talked of athletic sports with a young
man evidently better fitted to excel in that kind of thing than in any
pursuit demanding intelligence. This gentleman Christian had never met.
The two other callers, a grey-headed, military-looking person, and a
lady, possibly his wife, were equally strangers to him.

The drawing-room was much changed in appearance since Christian's last
visit. There was more display, a richer profusion of ornaments not in
the best taste. The old pictures had given place to showily-framed
daubs of the most popular school. On a little table at his elbow, he
remarked the photograph of a jockey who was just then engrossing public
affection. What did all this mean? Formerly, he had attributed every
graceful feature of the room to Constance's choice. He had imagined
that to her Mr. Palmer was indebted for guidance on points of aesthetic
propriety. Could it be that----?

He caught a glance which she cast in his direction, and instantly
forgot the troublesome problem. How dull of him to misunderstand her!
Her sportiveness had a double significance. It was the expression of a
hope which would not be subdued, and at the same time a means of
disguising the tender interest with which she regarded _him_. If she
had been blithe before his appearance, how could she suddenly change
her demeanour as soon as he entered? It would have challenged suspicion
and remark. For the same reason she affected to have all but forgotten
him. Of course! how could he have failed to see that? 'I thought of you
one day at Bordighera'--was not that the best possible way of making
known to him that he had never been out of her mind?

Sweet, noble, long-suffering Constance!

He took a place by her sister, and began to talk of he knew not what,
for all his attention was given to the sound of Constance's voice.

'Yes,' she was saying to the man of military appearance, 'it's very
early to come back to London, but I did get so tired of those foreign
places.'

(In other words, of being far from her Christian--thus he interpreted.)

'No, we didn't make a single pleasant acquaintance. A shockingly
tiresome lot of people wherever we went.'

(In comparison with the faithful lover, who waited, waited.)

'Foreigners are so stupid--don't you think so? Why should they always
expect you to speak _their_ language?--Oh, of course I speak French;
but it is such a disagreeable language--don't you think so?'

(Compared with the accents of English devotion, of course.)

'Do you go in for cycling, Mr. Moxey?' inquired Mrs. Palmer's laughing
niece, from a little distance.

'For cycling?' With a great effort he recovered himself and grasped the
meaning of the words. 'No, I--I'm sorry to say I don't. Capital
exercise!'

'Mr. Dwight has just been telling me such an awfully good story about a
friend of his. Do tell it again, Mr. Dwight! It'll make you laugh no
end, Mr. Moxey.'

The young man appealed to was ready enough to repeat his anecdote,
which had to do with a bold cyclist, who, after dining more than well,
rode his machine down a steep hill and escaped destruction only by
miracle. Christian laughed desperately, and declared that he had never
heard anything so good.

But the tension of his nerves was unendurable. Five minutes more of
anguish, and he sprang up like an automaton.

'Must you really go, Mr. Moxey?' said Constance, with a manner which of
course was intended to veil her emotion. 'Please don't be another year
before you let us see you again.'

Blessings on her tender heart! What more could she have said, in the
presence of all those people? He walked all the way to Notting Hill
through a pelting rain, his passion aglow.

Impossible to be silent longer concerning the brilliant future. Arrived
at home, he flung off hat and coat, and went straight to the
drawing-room, hoping to find Marcella alone. To his annoyance, a
stranger was sitting there in conversation, a very simply dressed lady,
who, as he entered, looked at him with a grave smile and stood up. He
thought he had never seen her before.

Marcella wore a singular expression; there was a moment of silence, for
Christian decidedly embarrassing, since it seemed to be expected that
he should greet the stranger.

'Don't you remember Janet?' said his sister.

'Janet?' He felt his face flush. 'You don't mean to say--? But how you
have altered! And yet, no; really, you haven't. It's only my
stupidity.' He grasped her hand, and with a feeling of genuine
pleasure, despite awkward reminiscences.

'One does alter in eleven years,' said Janet Moxey, in a very pleasant,
natural voice--a voice of habitual self-command, conveying the idea of
a highly cultivated mind, and many other agreeable things.

'Eleven years? Yes, yes! How very glad I am to see you! And I'm sure
Marcella was. How very kind of you to call on us!'

Janet was as far as ever from looking handsome or pretty, but it must
have been a dullard who proclaimed her face unpleasing. She had eyes of
remarkable intelligence, something like Marcella's but milder, more
benevolent. Her lips were softly firm; they would not readily part in
laughter; their frequent smile meant more than that of the woman who
sets herself to be engaging.

'I am on my way home,' she said, 'from a holiday in the South,--an
enforced holiday, I'm sorry to say.'

'You have been ill?'

'Overworked a little. I am practising medicine in Kingsmill.'

Christian did not disguise his astonishment.

'Medicine?'

'You don't remember that I always had scientific tastes?'

If it was a reproach, none could have been more gently administered.

'Of course--of course I do! Your botany, your skeletons of birds and
cats and mice--of course! But where did you study?'

'In London. The Women's Medical School. I have been in practice for
nearly four years.'

'And have overworked yourself.--But why are we standing? Let us sit
down and talk. How is your father?'

Marcella was watching her brother closely, and with a curious smile.

Janet remained for another hour. No reference was made to the long
rupture of intercourse between her family and these relatives.
Christian learnt that his uncle was still hale, and that Janet's four
sisters all lived, obviously unmarried. To-day he was disposed to be
almost affectionate with anyone who showed him a friendly face: he
expressed grief that his cousin must leave for Twybridge early in the
morning.

'Whenever you pass through the Midlands,' was Janet's indirect reply,
addressed to Marcella, 'try to stop at Kingsmill.'

And a few minutes after that she took her leave. There lingered behind
her that peculiar fragrance of modern womanhood, refreshing,
inspiriting, which is so entirely different from the merely feminine
perfume, however exquisite.

'What a surprising visit!' was Christian's exclamation, when he and his
sister were alone. 'How did she find us?'

'Directory, I suppose.'

'A lady doctor!' he mused.

'And a very capable one, I fancy,' said Marcella. 'We had nearly an
hour's talk before you came. But she won't be able to stand the work.
There'll be another breakdown before long.'

'Has she a large practice, then?'

'Not very large, perhaps; but she studies as well. I never dreamt of
Janet becoming so interesting a person.'

Christian had to postpone till after dinner the talk he purposed about
Mrs. Palmer. When that time came, he was no longer disposed for
sentimental confessions; it would be better to wait until he could
announce a settled project of marriage. Through the evening, his sister
recurred to the subject of Janet with curious frequency, and on the
following day her interest had suffered no diminution. Christian had
always taken for granted that she understood the grounds of the breach
between him and his uncle; without ever unbosoming himself, he had
occasionally, in his softer moments, alluded to the awkward subject in
language which he thought easy enough to interpret. Now at length, in
reply to some remark of Marcella's, he said with significant accent:

'Janet was very friendly to me.'

'She has studied science for ten years,' was his sister's comment.

'Yes, and can forgive a boy's absurdities.'

'Easier to forgive, certainly, than those of a man,' said Marcella,
with a curl of the lip.

Christian became silent, and went thoughtfully away.

A week later, he was again in Mrs. Palmer's drawing-room, where again
he met an assemblage of people such as seemed to profane this
sanctuary. To be sure--he said to himself--Constance could not at once
get rid of the acquaintances forced upon her by her husband; little by
little she would free herself. It was a pity that her sister and her
niece--persons anything but intelligent and refined--should be
permanent members of her household; for their sake, no doubt, she felt
constrained to welcome men and women for whose society she herself had
little taste. But when the year of her widowhood was past----Petrarch's
Laura was the mother of eleven children; Constance had had only three,
and one of these was dead. The remaining two, Christian now learnt,
lived with a governess in a little house at Bournemouth, which Mrs.
Palmer had taken for that purpose.

'I'm going down to see them to-morrow,' she informed Christian, 'and I
shall stay there over the next day. It's so quiet and restful.'

These words kept repeating themselves to Christian's ear, as he went
home, and all through the evening. Were they not an invitation? Down
there at Bournemouth, Constance would be alone the day after to-morrow.
'It is so quiet and restful;' that was to say, no idle callers would
break upon her retirement; she would be able to welcome a friend, and
talk reposefully with him. Surely she must have meant that; for she
spoke with a peculiar intonation--a look----

By the second morning he had worked himself up to a persuasion that
yonder by the seaside Constance was expecting him. To miss the
opportunity would be to prove himself dull of apprehension, a laggard
in love. With trembling hands, he hurried through his toilet and made
haste downstairs to examine a railway time-table. He found it was
possible to reach Bournemouth by about two o'clock, a very convenient
hour; it would allow him to take refreshment, and walk to the house
shortly after three.

His conviction strong as ever, he came to the journey's end, and in due
course discovered the pleasant little house of which Constance had
spoken. At the door, his heart failed him; but retreat could not now be
thought of. Yes, Mrs. Palmer was at home. The servant led him into a
sitting-room on the ground floor, took his name, and left him.

It was nearly ten minutes before Constance appeared. On her face he
read a frank surprise.

'I happened to--to be down here; couldn't resist the temptation'----

'Delighted to see you, Mr. Moxey. But how did you know I was here?'

He gazed at her.

'You--don't you remember? The day before yesterday--in Sussex
Square--you mentioned'----

'Oh, did I?' She laughed. 'I had quite forgotten.'

Christian sank upon his chair. He tried to convince himself that she
was playing a part; perhaps she thought that she had been premature in
revealing her wish to talk with him.

Mrs. Palmer was good-natured. This call evidently puzzled her, but she
did not stint her hospitality. When Christian asked after the children,
they were summoned; two little girls daintily dressed, pretty,
affectionate with their mother. The sight of them tortured Christian,
and he sighed deeply with relief when they left the room. Constance
appeared rather absent; her quick glance at him signified something,
but he could not determine what. In agony of constraint, he rose as if
to go.

'Oh, you will have a cup of tea with me,' said Mrs. Palmer. 'It will be
brought in a few minutes.'

Then she really wished him to stop. Was he not behaving like an obtuse
creature? Why, everything was planned to encourage him.

He talked recklessly of this and that, and got round to the years long
gone by. When the tea came, he was reviving memories of occasions on
which he and she had met as young people. Constance laughed merrily,
declared she could hardly remember.

'Oh, what a time ago!--But I was quite a child.'

'No--indeed, no! You were a young lady, and a brilliant one.'

The tea seemed to intoxicate him. He noticed again that Constance
glanced at him significantly. How good of her to allow him this
delicious afternoon!

'Mr. Moxey,' she said, after meditating a little, 'why haven't you
married? I should have thought you would have married long ago.'

He was stricken dumb. Her jerky laugh came as a shock upon his hearing.

'Married----?'

'What is there astonishing in the idea?'

'But--I--how can I answer you?'

The pretty, characterless face betrayed some unusual feeling. She
looked at him furtively; seemed to suppress a tendency to laugh.

'I mustn't pry into secrets,' she simpered.

'But there is no secret!' Christian panted, laying down his teacup for
fear he should drop it. 'Whom should I--could I have married?'

Constance also put aside her cup. She was bewildered, and just a little
abashed. With courage which came he knew not whence, Christian bent
forward and continued speaking:

'Whom could I marry after that day when I met you in the little
drawing-room at the Robinsons'?'

She stared in genuine astonishment, then was embarrassed.

'You cannot--cannot have forgotten----?'

'You surely don't mean to say, Mr. Moxey, that you have remembered? Oh,
I'm afraid I was a shocking flirt in those days!'

'But I mean _after_ your marriage--when I found you in tears'----

'Please, please don't remind me!' she exclaimed, giggling nervously.
'Oh how silly!--of me, I mean. To think that--but you are making fun of
me, Mr. Moxey?'

Christian rose and went to the window. He was not only shaken by his
tender emotions--something very like repugnance had begun to affect
him. If Constance were feigning, it was in very bad taste; if she spoke
with sincerity--what a woman had he worshipped! It did not occur to him
to lay the fault upon his own absurd romanticism. After eleven years'
persistence in one point of view, he could not suddenly see the affair
with the eyes of common sense.

He turned and approached her again.

'Do you not know, then,' he asked, with quiet dignity, 'that ever since
the day I speak of, I have devoted my life to the love I then felt? All
these years, have you not understood me?'

Mrs. Palmer was quite unable to grasp ideas such as these. Neither her
reading nor her experience prepared her to understand what Christian
meant. Courtship of a married woman was intelligible enough to her; but
a love that feared to soil itself, a devotion from afar, encouraged by
only the faintest hope of reward other than the most insubstantial--of
that she had as little conception as any woman among the wealthy vulgar.

'Do you really mean, Mr. Moxey, that you--have kept unmarried for _my_
sake?'

'You don't know that?' he asked, hoarsely.

'How could I? How was I to imagine such a thing? Really, was it proper?
How could you expect me, Mr. Moxey----?'

For a moment she looked offended. But her real feelings were
astonishment and amusement, not unmingled with an idle gratification.

'I must ask you to pardon me,' said Christian, whose forehead gleamed
with moisture.

'No, don't say that. I am really so sorry! What an odd mistake!'

'And I have hoped in vain--since you were free----?'

'Oh, you mustn't say such things! I shall never dream of marrying
again--never!'

There was a matter-of-fact vigour in the assertion which proved that
Mrs. Palmer spoke her genuine thought. The tone could not be
interpreted as devotion to her husband's memory; it meant, plainly and
simply, that she had had enough of marriage, and delighted in her
freedom.

Christian could not say another word. Disillusion was complete. The
voice, the face, were those of as unspiritual a woman as he could
easily have met with, and his life's story was that of a fool.

He took his hat, held out his hand, with 'Good-bye, Mrs. Palmer.' The
cold politeness left her no choice but again to look offended, and with
merely a motion of the head she replied, 'Good-bye, Mr. Moxey.'

And therewith permitted him to leave the house.