CHAPTER I


In the spring of 1882 Mr. Jarvis Runcorn, editor and co-proprietor of
the London _Weekly Post_, was looking about for a young man of
journalistic promise whom he might associate with himself in the
conduct of that long established Radical paper. The tale of his years
warned him that he could not hope to support much longer a burden which
necessarily increased with the growing range and complexity of public
affairs. Hitherto he had been the autocrat of the office, but competing
Sunday papers exacted an alertness, a versatile vigour, such as only
youth can supply; for there was felt to be a danger that the _Weekly
Post_ might lose its prestige in democratic journalism. Thus on the
watch, Mr. Runcorn--a wary man of business, who had gone through many
trades before he reached that of weekly literature--took counsel one
day with a fellow-campaigner, Malkin by name, who owned two or three
country newspapers, and had reaped from them a considerable fortune; in
consequence, his attention was directed to one John Earwaker, then
editing the _Wattleborough Courier_. Mr. Malkin's eldest son had
recently stood as Liberal candidate for Wattleborough, and though
defeated was loud in his praise of the _Courier_; with its editor he
had come to be on terms of intimate friendship. Earwaker was well
acquainted with journalistic life in the provinces. He sprang from a
humble family living at Kingsmill, had studied at Whitelaw College, and
was now but nine-and-twenty: the style of his 'leaders' seemed to mark
him for a wider sphere of work. It was decided to invite him to London,
and the young man readily accepted Mr. Runcorn's proposals. A few
months later he exchanged temporary lodgings for chambers in Staple
Inn, where he surrounded himself with plain furniture and many books.

In personal appearance he had changed a good deal since that prize-day
at Whitelaw when his success as versifier and essayist foretold a
literary career. His figure was no longer ungainly; the big head seemed
to fit better upon the narrow shoulders. He neither walked with
extravagant paces, nor waved his arms like a windmill. A sufficiency of
good food, and the habit of intercourse with active men; had given him
an every-day aspect; perhaps the sole peculiarity he retained from
student times was his hollow chuckle of mirth, a laugh which struggled
vainly for enlargement. He dressed with conventional decency, even
submitting to the chimney-pot hat. His features betrayed connection
with a physically coarse stock; but to converse with him was to
discover the man of original vigour and wide intellectual scope. With
ordinary companions, it was a rare thing for him to speak of his
professional interests. But for his position on _The Weekly Post_ it
would not have been easy to surmise how he stood with regard to
politics, and he appeared to lean as often towards the conservative as
to the revolutionary view of abstract questions.

The newspaper left him time for other literary work, and it was known
to a few people that he wrote with some regularity for reviews, but all
the products of his pen were anonymous. A fact which remained his own
secret was that he provided for the subsistence of his parents, old
people domiciled in a quiet corner of their native Kingsmill. The
strict sobriety of life which is indispensable to success in such a
career as this cost him no effort. He smoked moderately, ate and drank
as little as might be, could keep his health on six hours of sleep, and
for an occasional holiday liked to walk his twenty or thirty miles.
Earwaker was naturally marked for survival among the fittest.

On an evening of June in the year '84, he was interrupted whilst
equipping himself for dinner abroad, by a thunderous rat-tat-tat.

'You must wait, my friend, whoever you are,' he murmured placidly, as
he began to struggle with the stiff button-holes of his shirt.

The knock was repeated, and more violently.

'Now there's only one man of my acquaintance who knocks like that,' he
mused, elaborating the bow of his white tie. 'He, I should imagine, is
in Brazil; but there's no knowing. Perhaps our office is on
fire.--Anon, anon!'

He made haste to don waistcoat and swallow-tail, then crossed his
sitting-room and flung open the door of the chambers.

'Ha! Then it _is_ you! I was reminded of your patient habits.'

A tall man, in a light overcoat and a straw hat of spacious brim, had
seized both his hands, with shouts of excited greeting.

'Confound you! Why did you keep me waiting? I thought I had missed you
for the evening. How the deuce are you? And why the devil have you left
me without a line from you for more than six months?'

Earwaker drew aside, and allowed his tumultuous friend to rush into the
nearest room.

'Why haven't you written?--confound you!' was again vociferated, amid
bursts of boyish laughter. 'Why hasn't anybody written?'

'If everybody was as well informed of your movements as I, I don't
wonder,' replied the journalist. 'Since you left Buenos Ayres, I have
had two letters, each containing twenty words, which gave me to
understand that no answer could by possibility reach you.'

'Humbug! You could have written to half-a-dozen likely places. Did I
really say that? Ha, ha, ha!--Shake hands again, confound you! How do
you do? Do I look well? Have I a tropical colour? I say, what a blessed
thing it was that I got beaten down at Wattleborough! All this time I
should have been sitting in the fog at Westminster. What a time I've
had! What a time I've had!'

It was more than twelve months since Malkin's departure from England.
Though sun and sea had doubtless contributed to his robustness, he must
always have been a fair example of the vigorous Briton. His broad
shoulders, upright bearing, open countenance, and frank resonant voice,
declared a youth passed amid the wholesome conditions which wealth
alone can command. The hearty extravagance of his friendliness was only
possible in a man who has never been humiliated by circumstances, never
restricted in his natural needs of body and mind. Yet he had more than
the heartiness of a contented Englishman. The vivacity which made a
whirlwind about him probably indicated some ancestral mingling with the
blood of a more ardent race. Earwaker examined him with a smile of
pleasure.

'It's unfortunate,' he said, 'that I have to go out to dinner.'

'Dinner! Pooh! we can get dinner anywhere.'

'No doubt, but I am engaged.'

'The devil you are! Who is she? Why didn't you write to tell me?'

'The word has a less specific meaning, my dear fellow,' replied
Earwaker, laughing. 'Only you of all men would have rushed at the wrong
one. I mean to say--if your excitement can take in so common a
fact--that I have promised to dine with some people at Notting Hill,
and mustn't disappoint them.'

Malkin laughed at his mistake, then shouted:

'Notting Hill! Isn't that somewhere near Fulham? We'll take a cab, and
I can drop you on my way.'

'It wouldn't be on the way at all.'

The journalist's quiet explanation was cut short by a petulant outcry.

'Oh, very well! Of course if you want to get rid of me! I should have
thought after sixteen months'--

'Don't be idiotic,' broke in the other. 'There's a strong feminine
element in you, Malkin; that's exactly the kind of talk with which
women drive men to frenzy.'

'Feminine element!' shouted the traveller with hot face. 'What do you
mean? I propose to take a cab with you, and you'--

Earwaker turned away laughing. 'Time and distance are nothing to you,
and I shall be very glad of your company. Come by all means.'

His friend was instantly appeased.

'Don't let me make you late, Earwaker. Must we start this moment? Come
along, then. Can I carry anything for you? Lord! if you could only see
a tropical forest! How do you get on with old Runcorn? _Write_? What
the devil was the use of my writing, when words are powerless to
describe--? What a rum old place this seems, after experiences like
mine; how the deuce can you live here? I say, I've brought you a ton of
curiosities; will make your rooms look like a museum. Confound it! I've
broken my shin against the turn in the staircase! Whew! Who are you
going to dine with?--Moxey? Never heard the name.'

In Holborn a hansom was hailed, and the friends continued their
dialogue as they drove westward. Having at length effervesced, Malkin
began to exchange question and answer with something of the calm
needful for mutual intelligibility.

'And how do you get on with old Runcorn?'

'As well as can be expected where there is not a single subject of
agreement,' Earwaker replied. 'I have hopes of reducing our
circulation.'

'What the deuce do you mean?'

'In other words, of improving the paper. Runcorn is strong on the side
of blackguardism. We had a great fight the other day over a leader
offered by Kenyon,--a true effusion of the political gutter-snipe. I
refused point-blank to let it go in; Runcorn swore that, if I did not,
_I_ should go _out_. I offered to retire that moment. "We must write
for our public," he bellowed. "True," said I, "but not necessarily for
the basest among them. The standard at the best is low enough." "Do you
call yourself a Radical?" "Not if this be Radicalism." "You ought to be
on the _Morning_ instead of the _Weekly Post_." I had my way, and
probably shall end by sending Mr Kenyon back to his tinker's work shop.
If not, I must look out for cleaner occupation.'

'Go it, my boy! Go it!' cried Malkin, slapping his companion's knee
violently. 'Raise the tone! To the devil with mercenary considerations!
Help the proletariat out of its grovelling position.'

They approached the street where Earwaker had to alight. The other
declared his intention of driving on to Fulham in the hope of finding a
friend who lived there.

'But I must see you again. When shall you be home to-night?'

'About half-past eleven, I dare say.'

'Right! If I am free I'll come out to Staple Inn, and we'll talk till
three or four.'

The house at which the journalist presented himself was such as might
be inhabited by a small family of easy means. As he was taking off his
overcoat, a door opened and Christian Moxey came forward to greet him.
They shook hands like men who stood on friendly, but not exactly on
intimate, terms.

'Will you come up to the laboratory for a moment?' said Moxey. 'I
should like to show you something I have under the microscope.'

The room he spoke of was at the top of the house; two chambers had been
made into one, and the fittings were those required by a student of
physical science. Various odours distressed the air. A stranger to the
pursuits represented might have thought that the general disorder and
encumberment indicated great activity, but the experienced eye
perceived at once that no methodical work was here in progress.
Mineralogy, botany, biology, physics, and probably many other sciences,
were suggested by the specimens and apparatus that lay confusedly on
tables, shelves, or floor.

Moxey looked very slim and elegant in his evening costume. When he
touched any object, his long, translucent fingers seemed soft and
sensitive as a girl's. He stepped with peculiar lightness, and the
harmonious notes of his voice were in keeping with these other
characteristics. Ten years had developed in him that graceful languor
which at four-and-twenty was only beginning to get mastery over the
energies of a well-built frame.

'This stuff here,' he said, pointing to an open box full of mud, 'is
silt from down the Thames. It's positively loaded with
_diatomaceoe_,--you remember our talking about them when you were last
here? I am working at the fabric of the valves. Now, just look!'

Earwaker, with attentive smile, followed the demonstration.

'Peak is busy with them as well,' said Christian, presently. 'Has he
told you his theory of their locomotion? Nobody has found out yet how
the little beggars move about. Peak has a bright idea.'

They spent ten minutes in the laboratory, then went downstairs. Two
other guests had meanwhile arrived, and were conversing with the
hostess, Miss Moxey. The shy, awkward, hard-featured girl was grown
into a woman whose face made such declaration of intellect and
character that, after the first moment, one became indifferent to its
lack of feminine beauty. As if with the idea of compensating for
personal disadvantages, she was ornately dressed; her abundant tawny
hair had submitted to much manipulation, and showed the gleam of
jewels; expense and finished craft were manifest in every detail of her
garb. Though slightly round-shouldered, her form was well-proportioned
and suggested natural vigour. Like Christian, she had delicate hands.

'Do you know a distinguished clergyman, named Chilvers?' she asked of
Earwaker, with a laugh, when he had taken a place by her.

'Chilvers?--Is it Bruno Chilvers, I wonder?'

'That's the name!' exclaimed one of the guests, a young married lady of
eager face and fidgety manners.

'Then I knew him at College, but I had no idea he was become
distinguished.'

Miss Moxey again laughed.

'Isn't it amusing, the narrowness of a great clerical reputation? Mrs.
Morton was astonished that I had never heard his name.'

'Please don't think,' appealed the lady, looking anxiously at Earwaker,
'that I consider it shameful not to know him. I only happened to
mention a very ridiculous sermon of his, that was forced upon me by a
distressingly orthodox friend of mine. They tell me, he is one of the
newest lights of the Church.'

Earwaker listened with amusement, and then related anecdotes of Bruno
Chilvers. Whilst he was talking, the door opened to admit another
arrival, and a servant's voice announced 'Mr. Peak'. Miss Moxey rose,
and moved a step or two forward; a change was visible on her
countenance, which had softened and lightened.

'I am very sorry to be late,' said the new-comer, in a dull and rather
husky voice, which made strong contrast with the humorous tones his
entrance had interrupted.

He shook hands in silence with the rest of the company, giving merely a
nod and a smile as reply to some gracious commonplace from Mrs. Morton.

'Has it come to your knowledge,' Earwaker asked of him, 'that Bruno
Chilvers is exciting the orthodox world by his defence of Christianity
against neo-heathenism?'

'Chilvers?--No.'

'Mrs. Morton tells us that all the Church newspapers ring with his
name.'

'Please don't think,' cried Mrs. Morton, with the same anxious look as
before, 'that I read such papers. We never have such a thing in our
house, Mr. Peak. I have only been told about it.'

Peak smiled gravely, but made no other answer. Then he turned to
Earwaker.

'Where is he?'

'I can't say. Perhaps Mrs. Morton'--

'They tell me he is somewhere in Norfolk,' replied the lady. 'I forget
the town.'

A summons to dinner broke off the conversation. Moxey offered his arm
to the one lady present as guest, and Earwaker did the same courtesy to
the hostess. Mr. Morton, a meditative young man who had been listening
with a smile of indifference, sauntered along in the rear with Godwin
Peak.

At the dinner-table Peak was taciturn, and seemed to be musing on a
disagreeable subject. To remarks, he answered briefly and absently. As
Moxey, Earwaker, and Mrs. Morton kept up lively general talk, this
muteness was not much noticed, but when the ladies had left the room,
and Peak still frowned over his wineglass, the journalist rebuked him.

'What's the matter with you? Don't depress us.'

The other laughed impatiently, and emptied his glass.

'Malkin has come back,' pursued Earwaker. 'He burst in upon me, just as
I was leaving home--as mad as a March hare. You must come and meet him
some evening.'

'As you please.'

Returned to the upper room, Peak seated himself in a shadowy corner,
crossed his legs, thrust his hands into his pockets, and leaned back to
regard a picture on the wall opposite. This attitude gave sufficient
proof of the change that had been wrought in him by the years between
nineteen and nine-and-twenty; even in a drawing-room, he could take his
ease unconcernedly. His face would have led one to suppose him an older
man; it was set in an expression of stern, if not morose,
thoughtfulness.

He had small, hard lips, indifferent teeth (seldom exhibited), a
prominent chin, a long neck; his body was of firm, not ungraceful
build. Society's evening uniform does not allow a man much scope in the
matter of adornments; it was plain, however, that Godwin no longer
scorned the tailor and haberdasher. He wore a suit which confidently
challenged the criticism of experts, and the silk socks visible above
his shoes might have been selected by the most fastidious of worldlings.

When he had sat there for some minutes, his eyes happened to stray
towards Miss Moxey, who was just then without a companion. Her glance
answered to his, and a smile of invitation left him no choice but to
rise and go to a seat beside her.

'You are meditative this evening,' she said, in a voice subdued below
its ordinary note.

'Not very fit for society, to tell the truth,' Godwin answered,
carelessly. 'One has such moods, you know. But how would you take it
if, at the last moment, I sent a telegram, "Please excuse me. Don't
feel able to talk"?'

'You don't suppose I should be offended?'

'Certainly you would.'

'Then you know less of me than I thought.'

Her eyes wandered about the room, their smile betokening an uneasy
self-consciousness.

'Christian tells me,' she continued, 'that you are going to take your
holiday in Cornwall.'

'I thought of it. But perhaps I shan't leave town at all. It wouldn't
be worth while, if I go abroad at the end of the year.'

'Abroad?' Marcella glanced at him. 'What scheme is that?'

'Haven't I mentioned it? I want to go to South America and the Pacific
islands. Earwaker has a friend, who has just come back from travel in
the tropics; the talk about it has half decided me to leave England. I
have been saving money for years to that end.'

'You never spoke of it--to me, Marcella replied, turning a bracelet on
her wrist. 'Should you go alone?'

'Of course. I couldn't travel in company. You know how impossible it
would be for me to put up with the moods and idiosyncrasies of other
men.'

There was a quiet arrogance in his tone. The listener still smiled, but
her fingers worked nervously.

'You are not so unsocial as you pretend,' she remarked, without looking
at him.

'Pretend! I make no pretences of any kind,' was his scornful answer.

'You are ungracious this evening.'

'Yes--and can't hide it.'

'Don't try to, I beg. But at least tell me what troubles you.'

'That's impossible,' Peak replied, drily.

'Then friendship goes for nothing,' said Marcella, with a little forced
laugh.

'Yes--in all but a very few human concerns. How often could _you_ tell
_me_ what it is that prevents your taking life cheerfully?'

He glanced at her, and Marcella's eyes fell; a moment after, there was
a suspicion of colour in her cheek.

'What are you reading?' Peak asked abruptly, but in a voice of more
conventional note.

'Still Hafiz.'

'I envy your power of abstraction.'

'Yet I hear that you are deeply concerned about the locomotive powers
of the _diatomaceaoe_?'

Their eyes met, and they laughed--not very mirthfully.

'It preserves me from worse follies,' said Peak. 'After all, there are
ways more or less dignified of consuming time'--

As he spoke, his ear caught a familiar name, uttered by Christian
Moxey, and he turned to listen. Moxey and Earwaker were again talking
of the Rev. Bruno Chilvers. Straightway disregarding Marcella, Peak
gave attention to the men's dialogue, and his forehead wrinkled into
scornful amusement.

'It's very interesting,' he exclaimed, at a moment when there was
silence throughout the company, 'to hear that Chilvers is really coming
to the front. At Whitelaw it used to be prophesied that he would be a
bishop, and now I suppose he's fairly on the way to that. Shall we
write letters of congratulation to him, Earwaker?'

'A joint epistle, if you like.'

Mr. Morton, who had brightened since dinner, began to speak caustically
of the form of intellect necessary nowadays in a popular clergyman.

'He must write a good deal,' put in Earwaker, 'and that in a style
which would have scandalised the orthodox of the last century.
Rationalised dogma is vastly in demand.'

Peak's voice drew attention.

'Two kinds of books dealing with religion are now greatly popular, and
will be for a long time. On the one hand there is that growing body of
people who, for whatever reason, tend to agnosticism, but desire to be
convinced that agnosticism is respectable; they are eager for
anti-dogmatic books, written by men of mark. They couldn't endure to be
classed with Bradlaugh, but they rank themselves confidently with
Darwin and Huxley. Arguments matter little or nothing to them. They
take their rationalism as they do a fashion in dress, anxious only that
it shall be "good form". Then there's the other lot of people--a much
larger class--who won't give up dogma, but have learnt that bishops,
priests, and deacons no longer hold it with the old rigour, and that
one must be "broad"; these are clamorous for treatises which pretend to
reconcile revelation and science. It's quite pathetic to watch the
enthusiasm with which they hail any man who distinguishes himself by
this kind of apologetic skill, this pious jugglery. Never mind how
washy the book from a scientific point of view. Only let it obtain
vogue, and it will be glorified as the new evangel. The day has gone by
for downright assaults on science; to be marketable, you must prove
that _The Origin of Species_ was approvingly foreseen in the first
chapter of Genesis, and that the Apostles' Creed conflicts in no single
point with the latest results of biblical criticism. Both classes seek
to avoid ridicule, and to adapt themselves to a standard of
respectability. If Chilvers goes in for the newest apologetics, he is
bound to be enormously successful. The man has brains, and really there
are so few such men who still care to go into the Church.'

There was a murmur of laughing approval. The speaker had worked himself
into eloquent nervousness; he leaned forward with his hands straining
together, and the muscles of his face quivering.

'And isn't it surprising,' said Marcella, 'in how short a time this
apologetic attitude has become necessary?'

Peak flashed a triumphant look at her.

'I often rejoice to think of it!' he cried. 'How magnificent it is that
so many of the solemn jackasses who brayed against Darwin from ten to
twenty years ago should live to be regarded as beneath contempt! I say
it earnestly: this thought is one of the things that make life
tolerable to me!'

'You have need of charity, friend Peak,' interposed Earwaker. 'This is
the spirit of the persecutor.'

'Nothing of the kind! It is the spirit of justified reason. You may say
that those people were honestly mistaken;--such honesty is the brand of
a brainless obstructive. _They_ would have persecuted, but too gladly!
There were, and are, men who would have committed Darwin to penal
servitude, if they had had the power. Men like Lyell, who were able to
develop a new convolution in their brains, I respect heartily. I only
speak of the squalling mass, the obscene herd of idiot mockers.'

'Who assuredly,' remarked Earwaker, 'feel no shame whatever in the
retrospect of their idiocy. To convert a _mind_ is a subject for high
rejoicing; to confute a _temper_ isn't worth the doing.'

'That is philosophy,' said Marcella, 'but I suspect you of often
feeling as Mr. Peak does. I am sure _I_ do.'

Peak, meeting an amused glance from the journalist, left his seat and
took up a volume that lay on one of the tables. It was easy to see that
his hands shook, and that there was perspiration on his forehead. With
pleasant tact, Moxey struck into a new subject, and for the next
quarter of an hour Peak sat apart in the same attitude as before his
outburst of satire and invective. Then he advanced to Miss Moxey again,
for the purpose of taking leave. This was the signal for Earwaker's
rising, and in a few minutes both men had left the house.

'I'll go by train with you,' said Earwaker, as they walked away.
'Farringdon Street will suit me well enough.'

Peak vouchsafed no reply, but, when they had proceeded a little
distance, he exclaimed harshly:

'I hate emancipated women!'

His companion stopped and laughed loudly.

'Yes, I hate emancipated women,' the other repeated, with deliberation.
'Women ought neither to be enlightened nor dogmatic. They ought to be
sexual.'

'That's unusual brutality on your part.'

'Well, you know what I mean.'

'I know what you think you mean,' said Earwaker. 'But the woman who is
neither enlightened nor dogmatic is only too common in society. They
are fools, and troublesome fools.'

Peak again kept silence.

'The emancipated woman,' pursued his friend, 'needn't be a Miss Moxey,
nor yet a Mrs. Morton.'

'Miss Moxey is intolerable,' said Peak. 'I can't quite say why I
dislike her so, but she grows more antipathetic to me the better I know
her. She has not a single feminine charm--not one. I often feel very
sorry for her, but dislike her all the same.'

'Sorry for her,' mused Earwaker. 'Yes, so do I. I can't like her
either. She is certainly an incomplete woman. But her mind is of no low
order. I had rather talk with her than with one of the imbecile
prettinesses. I half believe you have a sneaking sympathy with the men
who can't stand education in a wife.'

'It's possible. In some moods.'

'In no mood can I conceive such a prejudice. I have no great attraction
to women of any kind, but the uneducated woman I detest.'

'Well, so do I,' muttered Peak. 'Do you know what?' he added, abruptly.
'I shall be off to the Pacific. Yes, I shall go this next winter. My
mind is made up.'

'I shan't try to dissuade you, old fellow, though I had rather have you
in sight. Come and see Malkin. I'll drop you a note with an
appointment.'

'Do.'

They soon reached the station, and exchanged but few more words before
Earwaker's leaving the train at Farringdon Street. Peak pursued his
journey towards the south-east of London.

On reaching home, the journalist flung aside his foolish coat of
ceremony, indued a comfortable jacket, lit a pipe with long stem, and
began to glance over an evening newspaper. He had not long reposed in
his arm-chair when the familiar appeal thundered from without. Malkin
once more shook his hand effusively.

'Had my journey to Fulham for nothing. Didn't matter; I ran over to
Putney and looked up my old landlady. The rooms are occupied by a
married couple, but I think we shall succeed in persuading them to make
way for me. I promised to find them lodgings every bit as good in two
days' time.'

'If that is so easy, why not take the new quarters yourself?'

'Why, to tell you the truth, I didn't think of it!--Oh, I had rather
have the old crib; I can do as I like there, you know. Confound it! Now
I shall have to spend all to-morrow lodging-hunting for other people.
Couldn't I pay a man to do it? Some confidential agent--private
police--you know what I mean?'

'A man of any delicacy,' replied Earwaker, with grave countenance,
'would feel bound by such a promise to personal exertion.'

'Right; quite right! I didn't mean it; of course I shall hunt
conscientiously. Oh, I say; I have brought over a couple of
armadilloes. Would you like one?'

'Stuffed, do you mean?'

'Pooh! Alive, man, alive! They only need a little care. I should think
you might keep the creature in your kitchen; they become quite
affectionate.'

The offer was unhesitatingly declined, and Malkin looked hurt. There
needed a good deal of genial explanation before Earwaker could restore
him to his sprightly mood.

'Where have you been dining?' cried the traveller. 'Moxey's--ah, I
remember. But who _is_ Moxey? A new acquaintance, eh?'

'Yes; I have known him about six months. Got to know him through Peak.'

'Peak? Peak? What, the fellow you once told me about--who disappeared
from Whitelaw because of his uncle, the cat's-meat man?'

'The man's-meat man, rather.'

'Yes, yes--the eating-house; I remember. You have met him again? Why on
earth didn't you tell me in your letters? What became of him? Tell me
the story.'

'Certainly, if you will cease to shake down plaster from the
ceiling.--We met in a restaurant (appropriate scene), happening to sit
at the same table. Whilst eating, we stared at each other fitfully.
"I'll be hanged if that isn't Peak," I kept saying to myself. And at
the same moment we opened our lips to question each other.'

'Just the same thing happened once to a friend of mine and a friend of
his. But it was on board ship, and both were devilish seasick.
Walker--you remember my friend Walker?--tells the story in a
side-splitting way. I wonder what has become of Walker? The last time I
met him he was travelling agent for a menagerie--a most interesting
fellow, Walker.--But I beg your pardon. Go on, old fellow!'

'Well, after that we at once saw a good deal of each other. He has been
working for years at a chemical factory down on the river; Moxey used
to be there, and got him the place.'

'Moxey?--Oh yes, the man you dined with. You must remember that these
are new names to me. I must know all these new people, I say. You don't
mind?'

'You shall be presented to the whole multitude, as soon as you like.
Peak wants to see you. He thinks of an excursion like this last of
yours.'

'He does? By Jove, we'll go together! I have always wanted a travelling
companion. We'll start as soon as ever he likes!--well, in a month or
two. I must just have time to look round. Oh, I haven't done with the
tropics yet! I must tell him of a rattling good insect-powder I have
invented; I think of patenting it. I say, how does one get a patent?
Quite a simple matter, I suppose?'

'Oh, always has been. The simplest and least worrying of all business
enterprises.'

'What? Eh? That smile of yours means mischief.'

In a quarter of an hour they had got back to the subject of Peak's
history.

'And did he really run away because of the eating-house?' Malkin
inquired.

'I shall never venture to ask, and it's not very likely he will admit
it. It was some time before he cared to talk much of Whitelaw.'

'But what is he doing? You used to think he would come out strong,
didn't you? Has he written anything?'

'A few things in _The Liberator_, five or six years ago.'

'What, the atheistic paper?'

'Yes. But he's ashamed of it now. That belongs to a bygone stage of
development.'

'Turned orthodox?'

Earwaker laughed.

'I only mean that he is ashamed of the connection with street-corner
rationalism.'

'Quite right. Devilish low, that kind of thing. But I went in for it
myself once. Did I ever tell you that I debated with a parson on
Mile-end Waste? Fact! That was in my hot-headed days. A crowd of
coster-mongers applauded me in the most flattering way.--I say,
Earwaker, you haven't any whisky?'

'Forgive me; your conversation makes me forget hospitality. Shall I
make hot water? I have a spirit-kettle.'

'Cold for me. I get in such a deuced perspiration when I begin to
talk.--Try this tobacco; the last of half a hundred-weight I took in at
Bahia.'

The traveller refreshed himself with a full tumbler, and resumed the
conversation cheerily.

'Has he just been wasting his time, then, all these years?'

'He goes in for science--laboratory work, evolutionary speculations. Of
course I can't judge his progress in such matters; but Moxey, a clever
man in the same line, thinks very highly of him.'

'Just the fellow to travel with. I want to get hold of some solid
scientific ideas, but I haven't the patience to work steadily. A
confounded fault of mine, you know, Earwaker,--want of patience. You
must have noticed it?'

'Oh--well, now and then, perhaps.'

'Yes, yes; but of course I know myself better. And now tell me about
Moxey. A married man, of course?'

'No, lives with a sister.'

'Unmarried sister?--Brains?'

'Pretty well supplied with that commodity.'

'You must introduce me to her. I do like women with brains.--

'Orthodox or enlightened?'

'Bitterly enlightened.'

'Really? Magnificent! Oh, I must know her. Nothing like an emancipated
woman! How any man can marry the ordinary female passes my
understanding. What do _you_ think?'

'My opinions are in suspense; not yet precipitated, as Peak might say.'

One o'clock sounded from neighbouring churches, but Malkin was wide
awake as ever. He entered upon a detailed narrative of his travels,
delightful to listen to, so oddly blended were the strains of conscious
and unconscious humour which marked his personality. Two o'clock; three
o'clock;--he would have talked till breakfast-time, but at last
Earwaker declared that the hour had come for sleep. As Malkin had taken
a room at the Inns of Court Hotel, it was easy for him to repair to his
quarters. The last his friend heard of him was an unexplained laugh,
echoing far down the staircase.