CHAPTER II


Peak's destination was Peckham Rye. On quitting the railway, he had a
walk of some ten minutes along a road which smelt of new bricks and
stucco heated by the summer sun; an obscure passage led him into a
street partly of dwelling-houses, partly of shops, the latter closed.
He paused at the side door of one over which the street lamp dimly
revealed--'Button, Herbalist'.

His latch-key admitted him to total darkness, but he moved forward with
the confidence of long use. He softly ascended two flights of stairs,
opened a door, struck a match, and found himself in a comfortable
sitting-room, soon illumined by a reading-lamp. The atmosphere, as
throughout the house, was strongly redolent of dried simples. Anyone
acquainted with the characteristics of furnished lodgings must have
surmised that Peak dwelt here among his own moveables, and was indebted
to the occupier of the premises for bare walls alone; the tables and
chairs, though plain enough, were such as civilisation permits; and
though there were no pictures, sundry ornaments here and there made
strong denial of lodging-house affinity. It was at once laboratory,
study, and dwelling-room. Two large cabinets, something the worse for
transportation, alone formed a link between this abode and the old home
at Twybridge. Books were not numerous, and a good microscope seemed to
be the only scientific instrument of much importance. On door-pegs hung
a knapsack, a botanist's vasculum, and a geologist's wallet.

A round table was spread with the materials of supper, and here again
an experienced lodger must have bestowed contemplative scrutiny, for no
hand of common landlady declared itself in the arrangement. The cloth
was spotless, the utensils tasteful and carefully disposed. In a bowl
lay an appetising salad, ready for mingling; a fragment of Camembert
cheese was relieved upon a setting of green leafage; a bottle of ale,
with adjacent corkscrew, stood beside the plate; the very loaf seemed
to come from no ordinary baker's, or was made to look better than its
kin by the fringed white cloth in which it nestled.

The custom of four years had accustomed Peak to take these things as a
matter of course, yet he would readily have admitted that they were
extraordinary enough. Indeed, he even now occasionally contrasted this
state of comfort with the hateful experiences of his first six years in
London. The subject of lodgings was one of those on which (often
intemperate of speech) he spoke least temperately. For six years he had
shifted from quarter to quarter, from house to house, driven away each
time by the hateful contact of vulgarity in every form,--by foulness
and dishonesty, by lying, slandering, quarrelling, by drunkenness, by
brutal vice,--by all abominations that distinguish the lodging-letter
of the metropolis. Obliged to practise extreme economy, he could not
take refuge among self-respecting people, or at all events had no luck
in endeavouring to find such among the poorer working-class. To a man
of Godwin's idiosyncrasy the London poor were of necessity abominable,
and it anguished him to be forced to live among them.

Rescue came at last, and in a very unexpected way. Resident in the more
open part of Bermondsey (winter mornings made a long journey to
Rotherhithe intolerable), he happened to walk one day as far as Peckham
Rye, and was there attracted by the shop window of a herbalist. He
entered to make a purchase, and got into conversation with Mr. Button,
a middle-aged man of bright intelligence and more reading than could be
expected. The herbalist led his customer to an upper room, in which
were stored sundry curiosities, and happened casually to say that he
was desirous of finding a lodger for two superfluous chambers. Peak's
inquiries led to his seeing Mrs. Button, whom he found to be a
Frenchwoman of very pleasing appearance; she spoke fluent
French-English, anything but disagreeable to an ear constantly
tormented by the London vernacular. After short reflection he decided
to take and furnish the rooms. It proved a most fortunate step, for he
lived (after the outlay for furniture) at much less expense than
theretofore, and in comparative luxury. Cleanliness, neatness, good
taste by no means exhausted Mrs. Button's virtues; her cooking seemed
to the lodger of incredible perfection, and the infinite goodwill with
which he was tended made strange contrast with the base usage he had
commonly experienced.

In these ten years he had paid but four visits to Twybridge, each of
brief duration. Naturally there were changes among his kinsfolk:
Charlotte, after an engagement which prolonged itself to the fifth
twelvemonth, had become Mrs. Cusse, and her husband now had a draper's
shop of his own, with two children already born into the world of
draperdom. Oliver, twice fruitlessly affianced, had at length (when
six-and-twenty) wedded a young person whom his mother and his aunt both
regarded as a most undesirable connection, the daughter (aged
thirty-two) of a man who was drinking himself to death on such money as
he could earn by casual reporting for a Twybridge newspaper. Mrs. Peak
the elder now abode with her sister at the millinery shop, and saw
little of her two married children. With Oliver and Charlotte their
brother had no sympathy, and affected none; he never wrote to them, nor
they to him; but years had strengthened his regard for his mother, and
with her he had fairly regular correspondence. Gladly he would have
seen her more often, but the air of shopkeeping he was compelled to
breathe when he visited Twybridge nauseated and repelled him. He
recognised the suitability both of Oliver and Charlotte for the
positions to which life had consigned them--they suffered from no
profitless aspiration; but it seemed to him a just cause of quarrel
with fate that his kindred should thus have relapsed, instead of
bettering the rank their father had bequeathed to them. He would not
avow to such friends as Moxey and Earwaker the social standing of his
only recognised relatives.

As for the unrecognised, he had long ago heard with some satisfaction
that Andrew Peak, having ultimately failed in his Kingsmill venture,
returned to London. Encounter with the fatal Andrew had been spared him
ever since that decisive day when Master Jowey Peak recited from
Coleridge and displayed his etymological genius.

For himself, he had earned daily bread, and something more; he had
studied in desultory fashion; he had seen a good deal of the British
Isles and had visited Paris. The result of it all was gnawing
discontent, intervals of furious revolt, periods of black despair.

He had achieved nothing, and he was alone.

Young still, to be sure; at twenty-nine it is too early to abandon
ambitions which are supported by force of brain and of will. But
circumstances must needs help if the desires of his soul were to be
attained. On first coming to London, received with all friendliness by
Christian Moxey, he had imagined that it only depended upon himself to
find admission before long to congenial society--by which he then
understood the companionship of intelligent and aspiring young men.
Christian, however, had himself no such circle, and knew that the
awkward lad from Twybridge could not associate with the one or two
wealthy families to which he could have presented him. The School of
Mines was only technically useful; it helped Godwin to get his place
with Bates & Sons, but supplied no friendships. In the third year,
Moxey inherited means and left the chemical works for continental
travel.

By tormenting attraction Godwin was often led to walk in the wealthy
districts of London. Why was no one of these doors open to him? There
were his equals; not in the mean streets where he dwelt. There were the
men of culture and capacity, the women of exquisite person and exalted
mind. Was he the inferior of such people? By heaven, no!

He chanced once to be in Hyde Park on the occasion of some public
ceremony, and was brought to pause at the edge of a gaping plebeian
crowd, drawn up to witness the passing of aristocratic vehicles. Close
in front of him an open carriage came to a stop; in it sat, or rather
reclined, two ladies, old and young. Upon this picture Godwin fixed his
eyes with the intensity of fascination; his memory never lost the
impress of these ladies' faces. Nothing very noteworthy about them; but
to Godwin they conveyed a passionate perception of all that is implied
in social superiority. Here he stood, one of the multitude, of the
herd; shoulder to shoulder with boors and pick-pockets; and within
reach of his hand reposed those two ladies, in Olympian calm, seeming
unaware even of the existence of the throng. Now they exchanged a word;
now they smiled to each other. How delicate was the moving of their
lips! How fine must be their enunciation! On the box sat an old
coachman and a young footman; they too were splendidly impassive,
scornful of the multitudinous gaze.--The block was relieved, and on the
carriage rolled.

They were his equals, those ladies, merely his equals. With such as
they he should by right of nature associate.

In his rebellion, he could not hate them. He hated the malodorous
rabble who stared insolently at them and who envied their immeasurable
remoteness. Of mere wealth he thought not; might he only be recognised
by the gentle of birth and breeding for what he really was, and be
rescued from the promiscuity of the vulgar!

Yet at this time he was drawn into connection with the movement of
popular Radicalism which revolts against religious respectability.
Inherited antipathy to all conventional forms of faith outweighed his
other prejudices so far as to induce him to write savage papers for
_The Liberator_. Personal contact with artisan freethinkers was
disgusting to him. From the meeting of emancipated workmen he went away
with scorn and detestation in his heart; but in the quiet of his
lodgings he could sit down to aid their propaganda. One explanation of
this inconsistency lay in the fact that no other channel was open to
his literary impulses. Pure science could not serve him, for he had no
original results to announce. Pure literature seemed beyond his scope,
yet he was constantly endeavouring to express himself. He burned with
the desire of fame, and saw no hope of achieving it save as an author.
_The Liberator_ would serve him as a first step. In time he might get
foothold in the monthly reviews, and see his name side by side with
those of the leaders of thought.

Occasions, of course, offered when he might have extended his
acquaintance, but they were never of a kind that he cared to use; at
best they would only have admitted him to the homes of decent,
semi-educated families, and for such society he was altogether
unfitted. The licence of the streets but seldom allured him. After his
twenty-fourth year he was proof against the decoys of venal pleasure,
and lived a life of asceticism exceedingly rare in young and lonely
men. When Christian Moxey returned to London and took the house at
Notting Hill, which he henceforth occupied together with his sister, a
possibility of social intercourse at length appeared. Indeed it was a
substantial gain to sit from time to time at a civilised table, and to
converse amid graceful surroundings with people who at all events
followed the intellectual current of the day. Careless hitherto of his
personal appearance, he now cultivated an elegance of attire in
conformity with his aristocratic instincts, and this habit became
fixed. When next he visited Twybridge, the change in his appearance was
generally remarked. Mrs. Peak naturally understood it as a significant
result of his intercourse with Miss Moxey, of whom, as it seemed to
her, he spoke with singular reticence.

But Marcella had no charm for Godwin's imagination, notwithstanding
that he presently suspected a warmth of interest on her side which he
was far from consciously encouraging. Nor did he find among his friends
any man or woman for whose acquaintance he greatly cared. The Moxeys
had a very small circle, consisting chiefly of intellectual inferiors.
Christian was too indolent to make a figure in society, and his sister
suffered from peculiarities of mind and temperament which made it as
difficult for her as for Peak himself to form intimate friendships.

When chance encounter brought him into connection with Earwaker, the
revival of bygone things was at first doubtfully pleasant. Earwaker
himself, remarkably developed and become a very interesting man, was as
welcome an associate as he could have found, but it cost him some
effort to dismiss the thought of Andrew Peak's eating-house, and to
accept the friendly tact with which the journalist avoided all hint of
unpleasant memories. That Earwaker should refrain from a single
question concerning that abrupt disappearance, nearly ten years ago,
sufficiently declared his knowledge of the unspeakable cause, a
reflection which often made Godwin writhe. However, this difficulty was
overcome, and the two met very frequently. For several weeks Godwin
enjoyed better spirits than he had known since the first excitement of
his life in London faded away.

One result was easily foreseen. His mind grew busy with literary
projects, many that he had long contemplated and some that were new.
Once more he aimed at contributing to the 'advanced' reviews, and
sketched out several papers of sociological tenor. None of these were
written. As soon as he sat down to deliberate composition, a sense of
his deficiencies embarrassed him. Godwin's self-confidence had nothing
in common with the conceit which rests on imaginary strength. Power
there was in him; of that he could not but be conscious: its true
direction he had not yet learned. Defect of knowledge, lack of
pen-practice, confusion and contradictoriness of aims, instability of
conviction,--these faults he recognised in himself at every moment of
inward scrutiny.

On his table this evening lay a library volume which he had of late
been reading, a book which had sprung into enormous popularity. It was
called _Spiritual Aspects of Evolution_, and undertook, with confidence
characteristic of its kind, to reconcile the latest results of science
with the dogmas of Oriental religion. This work was in his mind when he
spoke so vehemently at Moxey's; already he had trembled with an impulse
to write something on the subject, and during his journey home a
possible essay had begun to shape itself. Late as was the hour he could
not prepare for sleep. His brain throbbed with a congestion of thought;
he struggled to make clear the lines on which his satire might direct
itself. By two o'clock he had flung down on paper a conglomerate of
burning ideas, and thus relieved he at length went to bed.

Two days later came a note from Staple Inn, inviting him to meet Malkin
the next evening. By this time he had made a beginning of his critical
essay, and the exordium so far satisfied him that he was tempted to
take it for Earwaker's judgment. But no; better his friend should see
the thing when it was complete.

About eight o'clock he reached the journalist's chambers. Malkin had
not yet arrived. Peak amused himself with examining certain tropical
products which the traveller had recently cast pell-mell into his
friend's sitting-room. Then sounded a knock at the door, but it was not
such as would have heralded the expected man.

'A telegram,' observed Earwaker, and went to take it in.

He returned with hoarse sounds of mirth.

'Our friend excuses himself. Read this characteristic despatch.'

Peak saw with surprise that the telegram far exceeded familiar
dimensions. 'Unspeakably grieved,' it began. 'Cannot possibly with you.
At moment's notice undertaken escort two poor girls Rouen. Not even
time look in apologise. Go via Dieppe and leave Victoria few minutes.
Hope be back Thursday. Express sincerest regret Mr. Peak. Lament
appearance discourtesy. Will apologise personally. Common humanity
constrains go Rouen. Will explain Thursday. No time add another word.
Rush tickets train.'

'There you have the man!' cried Earwaker. 'How do you class such a mind
as that? Ten to one this is some Quixotic obligation he has laid upon
himself, and probably he has gone without even a handbag.'

'Vocally delivered,' said Peak, 'this would represent a certain stage
of drunkenness. I suppose it isn't open to such an explanation?'

'Malkin never was intoxicated, save with his own vivacity.'

They discussed the singular being with good-natured mirth, then turned
by degrees to other topics.

'I have just come across a passage that will delight you,' said
Earwaker, taking up a book. 'Perhaps you know it.'

He read from Sir Thomas Brown's _Pscudodoxia Epidemica_. '"Men's names
should not only distinguish them. A man should be something that all
men are not, and individual in somewhat beside his proper name. Thus,
while it exceeds not the bound of reason and modesty, we cannot condemn
singularity. _Nos numerus sumus_ is the motto of the multitude, and for
that reason are they fools."'

Peak laughed his approval.

'It astonishes me,' he said, lighting his pipe, 'that you can go on
writing for this Sunday rag, when you have just as little sympathy with
its aims as I have. Do get into some less offensive connection.'

'What paper would you recommend?' asked the other, with his significant
smile.

'Why need you journalise at all?'

'On the whole, I like it. And remember, to admit that the multitude are
fools is not the same thing as to deny the possibility of progress.'

'Do you really believe yourself a democrat, Earwaker?'

'M--m--m! Well, yes, I believe the democratic spirit is stronger in me
than any other.'

Peak mused for a minute, then suddenly looked up.

'And what am I?'

'I am glad nothing much depends on my successfully defining you.'

They laughed together.

'I suppose,' said Godwin, 'you can't call a man a democrat who
recognises in his heart and soul a true distinction of social classes.
Social, mark. The division I instinctively support is by no means
intellectual. The well-born fool is very often more sure of my respect
than the working man who struggles to a fair measure of education.'

Earwaker would have liked to comment on this with remarks personal to
the speaker, but he feared to do so. His silence, however, was eloquent
to Peak, who resumed brusquely.

'I am not myself well-born,--though if my parents could have come into
wealth early in their lives, perhaps I might reasonably have called
myself so. All sorts of arguments can be brought against my prejudice,
but the prejudice is ineradicable. I respect hereditary social
standing, independently of the individual's qualities. There's nothing
of the flunkey in this, or I greatly deceive myself. Birth in a sphere
of refinement is desirable and respectable; it saves one, absolutely,
from many forms of coarseness. The masses are not only fools, but very
near the brutes. Yes, they can send forth fine individuals--but remain
base. I don't deny the possibility of social advance; I only say that
at present the lower classes are always disagreeable, often repulsive,
sometimes hateful.'

'I could apply that to the classes above them.'

'Well, I can't. But I am quite ready to admit that there are all sorts
of inconsistencies in me. Now, the other day I was reading Burns, and I
couldn't describe what exaltation all at once possessed me in the
thought that a ploughman had so glorified a servant-girl that together
they shine in the highest heaven, far above all the monarchs of earth.
This came upon me with a rush--a very rare emotion. Wasn't that
democratic?'

He inquired dubiously, and Earwaker for a moment had no reply but his
familiar 'M--m--m!'

'No, it was not democratic,' the journalist decided at length; 'it was
pride of intellect.'

'Think so? Then look here. If it happens that a whining wretch stops me
in the street to beg, what do you suppose is my feeling? I am ashamed
in the sense of my own prosperity. I can't look him in the face. If I
yielded to my natural impulse, I should cry out, "Strike me! spit at
me! show you hate me!--anything but that terrible humiliation of
yourself before me!" That's how I feel. The abasement of which _he_
isn't sensible affects _me_ on his behalf. I give money with what
delicacy I can. If I am obliged to refuse, I mutter apologies and hurry
away with burning cheeks. What does that mean?'

Earwaker regarded him curiously.

'That is mere fineness of humanity.'

'Perhaps moral weakness?'

'I don't care for the scalpel of the pessimist. Let us give it the
better name.'

Peak had never been so communicative. His progress in composition these
last evenings seemed to have raised his spirits and spurred the
activity of his mind. With a look of pleasure he pursued his
self-analysis.

'Special antipathies--sometimes explicable enough--influence me very
widely. Now, I by no means hate all orders of uneducated people. A
hedger, a fisherman, a country mason,--people of that kind I rather
like to talk with. I could live a good deal with them. But the London
vulgar I abominate, root and branch. The mere sound of their voices
nauseates me; their vilely grotesque accent and pronunciation--bah! I
could write a paper to show that they are essentially the basest of
English mortals. Unhappily, I know so much about them. If I saw the
probability of my dying in a London lodging-house, I would go out into
the sweet-scented fields and there kill myself.'

Earwaker understood much by this avowal, and wondered whether his
friend desired him so to do.

'Well, I can't say that I have any affection for the race,' he replied.
'I certainly believe that, socially and politically, there is less hope
of them than of the lower orders in any other part of England.'

'They are damned by the beastly conditions of their life!' cried
Godwin, excitedly. 'I don't mean only the slum-denizens. All, all
Hammersmith as much as St. George's-in-the-East. I must write about
this; I must indeed.'

'Do by all means. Nothing would benefit you more than to get your soul
into print.'

Peak delayed a little, then:

'Well, I am doing something at last.'

And he gave an account of his projected essay. By this time his hands
trembled with nervous agitation, and occasionally a dryness of the
palate half choked his voice.

'This may do very well,' opined Earwaker. 'I suppose you will try _The
Critical_?'

'Yes. But have I any chance? Can a perfectly unknown man hope to get
in?'

They debated this aspect of the matter. Seeing Peak had laid down his
pipe, the journalist offered him tobacco.

'Thanks; I can't smoke just yet. It's my misfortune that I can't talk
earnestly without throwing my body into disorder.'

'How stolid I am in comparison!' said Earwaker.

'That book of M'Naughten's,' resumed the other, going back to his
subject. 'I suppose the clergy accept it?'

'Largely, I believe.'

Peak mused.

'Now, if I were a clergyman'--

But his eye met Earwaker's, and they broke into laughter.

'Why not?' pursued Godwin. 'Did I ever tell you that my people
originally wished to make a parson of me? Of course I resisted tooth
and nail, but it seems to me now that I was rather foolish in doing so.
I wish I _had_ been a parson. In many ways the position would have
suited me very well.'

'M--m--m!'

'I am quite serious. Well, if I were so placed, I should preach Church
dogma, pure and simple. I would have nothing to do with these
reconciliations. I would stand firm as Jeremy Taylor; and in
consequence should have an immense and enthusiastic congregation.'

'I daresay.'

'Depend upon it, let the dogmas do what they still can. There's a vast
police force in them, at all events. A man may very strongly defend
himself for preaching them.'

The pursuit of this argument led Earwaker to ask:

'What proportion of the clergy can still take that standing in stolid
conscientiousness?'

'What proportion are convinced that it is untenable?' returned Peak.

'Many wilfully shut their eyes to the truth.'

'No, they don't shut their eyes!' cried Godwin. 'They merely lower a
nictitating membrane which permits them to gaze at light without
feeling its full impact.'

'I recommend you to bring that into your paper,' said the journalist,
with his deep chuckle.

An hour later they were conversing with no less animation, but the talk
was not so critical. Christian Moxey had come up as a topic, and
Earwaker was saying that he found it difficult to divine the man's
personality.

'You won't easily do that,' replied Peak, 'until you know more of his
story. I can't see that I am bound to secrecy--at all events with you.
Poor Moxey imagines that he is in love, and the fancy has lasted about
ten years.

'Ten years?'

'When I first knew him he was paying obvious attentions to a rather
plain cousin down at Twybridge. Why, I don't know, for he certainly was
devoted to a girl here in London. All he has confessed to me is that he
had given up hopes of her, but that a letter of some sort or other
revived them, and he hastened back to town. He might as well have
stayed away; the girl very soon married another man. Less than a year
later she had bitterly repented this, and in some way or other she
allowed Moxey to know it. Since then they have been Platonic
lovers--nothing more, I am convinced. They see each other about once in
six months, and presumably live on a hope that the obnoxious husband
may decease. I only know the woman as "Constance"; never saw her.'

'So that's Moxey? I begin to understand better.'

'Admirable fellow, but deplorably weak. I have an affection for him,
and have had from our first meeting.'

'Women!' mused Earwaker, and shook his head.

'You despise them?'

'On the whole, I'm afraid so.'

'Yes, but _what_ women?' cried the other with impatience. 'It would be
just as reasonable to say that you despise men. Can't you see that?'

'I doubt it.'

'Now look here; the stock objections to women are traditional. They
take no account of the vast change that is coming about. Because women
were once empty-headed, it is assumed they are all still so _en masse_.
The defect of the female mind? It is my belief that this is nothing
more nor less than the defect of the uneducated human mind. I believe
most men among the brutally ignorant exhibit the very faults which are
cried out upon as exclusively feminine. A woman has hitherto been an
ignorant human being; that explains everything.'

'Not everything; something, perhaps. Remember your evolutionism. The
preservation of the race demands in women many kinds of irrationality,
of obstinate instinct, which enrage a reasoning man. Don't suppose I
speak theoretically. Four or five years ago I had really made up my
mind to marry; I wasted much valuable time among women and girls, of
anything but low social standing. But my passions were choked by my
logical faculty. I foresaw a terrible possibility--that I might beat my
wife. One thing I learned with certainty was that the woman, _qua_
woman, hates abstract thought--hates it. Moreover (and of consequence)
she despises every ambition that has not a material end.'

He enlarged upon the subject, followed it into all its ramifications,
elaborated the inconsistencies with which it is rife. Peak's reply was
deliberate.

'Admitting that some of these faults are rooted in sex, I should only
find them intolerable when their expression took a vulgar form. Between
irrationality and coarseness of mind there is an enormous distinction.'

'With coarse minds I have nothing to do.'

'Forgive me if I ask you a blunt question,' said Peak, after
hesitating. 'Have you ever associated with women of the highest
refinement?'

Earwaker laughed.

'I don't know what that phrase means. It sounds rather odd on your
lips.'

'Well, women of the highest class of commoners. With peeresses we
needn't concern ourselves.'

'You imagine that social precedence makes all that difference in women?'

'Yes, I do. The daughter of a county family is a finer being than any
girl who can spring from the nomad orders.'

'Even supposing your nomads produce a Rachel or a Charlotte Brontee?'

'We are not talking of genius,' Peak replied.

'It was irrelevant, I know.--Well, yes, I _have_ conversed now and then
with what you would call well-born women. They are delightful
creatures, some of them, in given circumstances. But do you think I
ever dreamt of taking a wife drenched with social prejudices?'

Peak's face expressed annoyance, and he said nothing.

'A man's wife,' pursued Earwaker, 'may be his superior in whatever you
like, _except_ social position. That is precisely the distinction that
no woman can forget or forgive. On that account they are the
obstructive element in social history. If I loved a woman of rank above
my own she would make me a renegade; for her sake I should deny my
faith. I should write for the _St. James's Gazette_, and at last poison
myself in an agony of shame.'

A burst of laughter cleared the air for a moment, but for a moment
only. Peak's countenance clouded over again, and at length he said in a
lower tone:

'There are men whose character would defy that rule.'

'Yes--to their own disaster. But I ought to have made one exception.
There is a case in which a woman will marry without much regard to her
husband's origin. Let him be a parson, and he may aim as high as he
chooses.'

Peak tried to smile. He made no answer, and fell into a fit of brooding.

'What's all this about?' asked the journalist, when he too had mused
awhile. 'Whose acquaintance have you been making?'

'No one's.'

The suspicion was inevitable.

'If it were true, perhaps you would be justified in mistrusting my way
of regarding these things. But it's the natural tendency of my mind. If
I ever marry at all, it will be a woman of far higher birth than my
own.'

'Don't malign your parents, old fellow. They gave you a brain inferior
to that of few men. You will never meet a woman of higher birth.'

'That's a friendly sophism. I can't thank you for it, because it has a
bitter side.'

But the compliment had excited Peak, and after a moment's delay he
exclaimed:

'I have no other ambition in life--no other! Think the confession as
ridiculous as you like; my one supreme desire is to marry a perfectly
refined woman. Put it in the correct terms: I am a plebeian, and I aim
at marrying a lady.'

The last words were flung out defiantly. He quivered as he spoke, and
his face flushed.

'I can't wish you success,' returned his friend, with a grave smile.

'You couldn't help it sounding like a sneer, if you did. The desire is
hopeless, of course. It's because I know that, that I have made up my
mind to travel for a year or two; it'll help me on towards the age when
I shall regard all women with indifference. We won't talk about it any
more.'

'One question. You seriously believe that you could find satisfaction
in the life to which such a marriage would condemn you?'

'What life?' asked Peak, impatiently.

'That of an average gentleman, let us say, with house in town and
country, with friends whose ruling motive was social propriety.'

'I could enjoy the good and throw aside the distasteful.'

'What about the distastefulness of your wife's crass conventionalism,
especially in religion?'

'It would not be _crass_, to begin with. If her religion were genuine,
I could tolerate it well enough; if it were merely a form, I could
train her to my own opinions. Society is growing liberal--the best of
it. Please remember that I have in mind a woman of the highest type our
civilisation can produce.'

'Then you mustn't look for her in society!' cried Earwaker.

'I don't care; where you will, so long as she had always lived among
people of breeding and high education, and never had her thoughts
soiled with the vile contact of poverty.'

Earwaker started up and reached a volume from a shelf. Quickly finding
the desired page, he began to read aloud:

'Dear, had the world in its caprice Deigned to proclaim--I know you
both, Have recognised your plighted troth, Am sponsor for you; live in
peace!'--

He read to the end of the poem, and then looked up with an admiring
smile.

'An ideal!' exclaimed Peak. 'An ideal akin to Murger's and Musset's
grisettes, who never existed.'

'An ideal, most decidedly. But pray what is this consummate lady you
have in mind? An ideal every bit as much, and of the two I prefer
Browning's. For my own part, I am a polygamist; my wives live in
literature, and too far asunder to be able to quarrel. Impossible
women, but exquisite. They shall suffice to me.'

Peak rose, sauntered about the room for a minute or two, then said:

'I have just got a title for my paper. I shall call it "The New
Sophistry."'

'Do very well, I should think,' replied the other, smiling. 'Will you
let me see it when it's done?'

'Who knows if I shall finish it? Nothing I ever undertook has been
finished yet--nothing won that I ever aimed at. Good night. Let me hear
about Malkin.'

In a week's time Godwin received another summons to Staple Inn, with
promise of Malkin's assured presence. In reply he wrote:

'Owing to a new arrangement at Bates's, I start tomorrow for my holiday
in Cornwall, so cannot see you for a few weeks. Please offer Malkin my
apologies; make them (I mean it) as profuse as those he telegraphed.
Herewith I send you my paper, "The New Sophistry", which I have written
at a few vehement sittings, and have carelessly copied. If you think it
worth while, will you have the kindness to send it for me to _The
Critical_? I haven't signed it, as my unmeaning name would perhaps
indispose the fellow to see much good in it. I should thank you if you
would write in your own person, saying that you act for a friend; you
are probably well known in those quarters. If it is accepted, time
enough to claim my glory. If it seems to you to have no chance, keep it
till I return, as I hate the humiliation of refusals.--Don't think I
made an ass of myself the other night. We will never speak on that
subject again. All I said was horribly sincere, but I'm afraid you
can't understand that side of my nature. I should never have spoken so
frankly to Moxey, though he has made no secret with me of his own
weaknesses. If I perish before long in a South American swamp, you will
be able to reflect on my personality with completer knowledge, so I
don't regret the indiscretion.'