CHAPTER IV


And from the Moxeys Buckland had derived his information. What was it
he said--something about 'an odd look' on Miss Moxey's face when that
friend of theirs talked of Peak? Might not such a look signify a
conflict between the temptation to injure and the desire to screen?

Sidwell constructed a complete romance. Ignorance of the past of both
persons concerned allowed her imagination free play. There was no limit
to the possibilities of self-torment.

The desire to see Godwin took such hold upon her, that she had already
begun to think over the wording of another note to be sent to him the
first thing in the morning. His reply had been insufficient: simple
justice required that she should hear him in his own defence before
parting with him for ever. If she kept silence, he would always
remember her with bitterness, and this would make her life-long sorrow
harder to bear. Sidwell was one of those few women whose love, never
demonstrative, never exigent, only declares itself in all its profound
significance when it is called upon to pardon. What was likely to be
the issue of a meeting with Godwin she could not foresee. It seemed all
but impossible for their intercourse to continue, and their coming face
to face might result in nothing but distress to both, better avoided;
yet judgment yielded to emotion. Yesterday--only yesterday--she had
yielded herself to the joy of loving, and before her consciousness had
had time to make itself familiar with its new realm, before her eyes
had grown accustomed to the light suddenly shed about her, she was
bidden to think of what had happened as only a dream. Her heart refused
to make surrender of its hope. Though it could be held only by an
encouragement of recognised illusion, she preferred to dream yet a
little longer. Above all, she must taste the luxury of forgiving her
lover, of making sure that her image would not dwell in his mind as
that of a self-righteous woman who had turned coldly from his error,
perhaps from his repentance.

A little after midnight, she rose from bed, slipped on her
dressing-gown, and sat down by the still burning lamp to write what her
passion dictated:


'Why should you distrust my ability, or my willingness to understand
you? It would have been so much better if you had sent what you first
wrote. These few lines do not even let me know whether you think
yourself to blame. Why do you leave me to form a judgment of things as
they appear on the surface? If you _wish_ to explain, if you sincerely
feel that I am in danger of wronging you by misconstruction, come to me
as soon as you have received this note. If you will not come, then at
least write to me--the letter you at first thought of sending. This
afternoon (Friday) I return to London, but you know my address there.
Don't think because I wrote so briefly that I have judged you.

S. W.'


To have committed this to paper was a relief. In the morning she would
read it over and consider again whether she wished to send it.

On the table lay _The Critical_. She opened it once more at the page
that concerned her, and glanced over the first few lines. Then, having
put the lamp nearer to the bed, she again lay down, not to sleep but to
read.

This essay was not so repugnant to her mind or her feelings as when she
first became acquainted with it. Its bitterness no longer seemed to be
directed against herself. There was much in it with which she could
have agreed at any time during the last six months, and many strokes of
satire, which till the other day would have offended her, she now felt
to be legitimate. As she read on, a kind of anger such as she had never
experienced trembled along her nerves. Was it not flagrantly true that
English society at large made profession of a faith which in no sense
whatever it could be said sincerely to hold? Was there not every reason
to believe that thousands of people keep up an ignoble formalism,
because they feared the social results of declaring their severance
from the religion of the churches? This was a monstrous evil; she had
never till this moment understood the scope of its baneful effects. But
for the prevalence of such a spirit of hypocrisy, Godwin Peak would
never have sinned against his honour. Why was it not declared in
trumpet-tones of authority, from end to end of the Christian world,
that Christianity, as it has been understood through the ages, can no
longer be accepted? For that was the truth, the truth, the _truth_!

She lay back, quivering as if with terror. For an instant her soul had
been filled with hatred of the religion for which she could once have
died. It had stood before her as a power of darkness and ignorance, to
be assailed, crushed, driven from the memory of man.

Last night she had hardly slept, and now, though her body was numb with
weariness, her mind kept up a feverish activity. She was bent on
excusing Godwin, and the only way in which she could do so was by
arraigning the world for its huge dishonesty. In a condition between
slumber and waking, she seemed to plead for him before a circle of
Pharisaic accusers. Streams of silent eloquence rushed through her
brain, and the spirit which prompted her was closely akin to that of
'The New Sophistry'. Now and then, for a few seconds, she was smitten
with a consciousness of extraordinary change in her habits of thought.
She looked about her with wide, fearful eyes, and endeavoured to see
things in the familiar aspect. As if with physical constraint her angry
imagination again overcame her, until at length from the penumbra of
sleep she passed into its profoundest gloom.

To wake when dawn was pale at the window. A choking odour reminded her
that she had not extinguished the lamp, which must have gone out for
lack of oil. She opened the window, took a draught of water, and
addressed herself to sleep again. But in recollecting what the new day
meant for her, she had spoilt the chances of longer rest. Her head
ached; all worldly thoughts were repulsive, yet she could not dismiss
them. She tried to repeat the prayers she had known since childhood,
but they were meaningless, and a sense of shame attached to their
utterance.

When the first gleam of sun told her that it was past eight o clock,
she made an effort and rose.

At breakfast Mrs. Warricombe talked of the departure for London. She
mentioned an early train; by getting ready as soon as the meal was
over, they could easily reach the station in time. Sidwell made no
direct reply and seemed to assent; but when they rose from the table,
she said, nervously:

'I couldn't speak before the servants. I wish to stay here till the
afternoon.'

'Why, Sidwell?'

'I have asked Mr. Peak to come and see me this morning.'

Her mother knew that expostulation was useless, but could not refrain
from a long harangue made up of warning and reproof.

'You have very little consideration for me,' was her final remark. 'Now
we shan't get home till after dark, and of course my throat will be bad
again.'

Glad of the anti-climax, Sidwell replied that the day was much warmer,
and that with care no harm need come of the journey.

'It's easy to say that, Sidwell. I never knew you to behave so
selfishly, never!'

'Don't be angry with me, mother. You don't know how grieved I am to
distress you so. I can't help it, dear; indeed, I can't. Won't you
sacrifice a few hours to put my mind at rest?'

Mrs. Warricombe once more gave expression to her outraged feelings.
Sidwell could only listen silently with bent head.

If Godwin were coming at all, he would be here by eleven o'clock.
Sidwell had learnt that her letter was put into his hands. She asked
him to come at once, and nothing but a resolve not to meet her could
delay him more than an hour or two.

At half-past ten the bell sounded. She was sitting in the library with
her back turned to the door. When a voice announced 'Mr. Peak', she did
not at once rise, and with a feeling akin to terror she heard the
footstep slowly approaching. It stopped at some distance from her;
then, overcoming a weakness which threatened to clog her as in a
nightmare, she stood up and looked round.

Peak wore neither overcoat nor gloves, but otherwise was dressed in the
usual way. As Sidwell fixed her eyes upon him, he threw his hat into a
chair and came a step or two nearer. Whether he had passed the night in
sleep or vigil could not be determined; but his look was one of shame,
and he did not hold himself so upright as was his wont.

'Will you come and sit down?' said Sidwell, pointing to a chair not far
from that on which one of her hands rested.

He moved forward, and was about to pass near her, when Sidwell
involuntarily held her hand to him. He took it and gazed into her face
with a melancholy smile.

'What does it mean?' she asked, in a low voice.

He relinquished her fingers, which he had scarcely pressed, and stood
with his arms behind his back.

'Oh, it's all quite true,' was his reply, wearily spoken.

'What is true?'

'All that you have heard from your brother.'

'All?--But how can you know what he has said?'

They looked at each other. Peak's lips were set as if in resistance of
emotion, and a frown wrinkled his brows. Sidwell's gaze was one of fear
and appeal.

'He said, of course, that I had deceived you.'

'But in what?--Was there no truth in anything you said to me?'

'To you I have spoken far more truth than falsehood.'

A light shone in her eyes, and her lips quivered.

'Then,' she murmured, 'Buckland was not right in everything.'

'I understand. He wished you to believe that my love was as much a
pretence as my religion?'

'He said that.'

'It was natural enough.--And you were disposed to believe it?'

'I thought it impossible. But I should have thought the same of the
other things.'

Peak nodded, and moved away. Watching him, Sidwell was beset with
conflicting impulses. His assurance had allayed her worst misgiving,
and she approved the self-restraint with which he bore himself, but at
the same time she longed for a passionate declaration. As a reasoning
woman, she did her utmost to remember that Peak was on his defence
before her, and that nothing could pass between them but grave
discussion of the motives which had impelled him to dishonourable
behaviour. As a woman in love, she would fain have obscured the moral
issue by indulgence of her heart's desire. She was glad that he held
aloof, but if he had taken her in his arms, she would have forgotten
everything in the moment's happiness.

'Let us sit down, and tell me--tell me all you can.'

He delayed a moment, then seated himself opposite to her. She saw now
that his movements were those of physical fatigue; and the full light
from the window, enabling her to read his face more distinctly,
revealed the impress of suffering. Instead of calling upon him to atone
in such measure as was possible for the wrong he had done her, she felt
ready to reproach herself for speaking coldly when his need of solace
was so great.

'What can I tell you,' he said, 'that you don't know, or that you can't
conjecture?'

'But you wrote that there was so much I could not be expected to
understand. And I can't, can't understand you. It still seems
impossible. Why did you hide the truth from me?'

'Because if I had begun by telling it, I should never have won a kind
look or a kind thought from you.'

Sidwell reflected.

'But what did you care for me then--when it began?'

'Not so much as I do now, but enough to overthrow all the results of my
life up to that time. Before I met you in this house I had seen you
twice, and had learned who you were. I was sitting in the Cathedral
when you came there with your sister and Miss Moorhouse--do you
remember? I heard Fanny call you by your name, and that brought to my
mind a young girl whom I had known in a slight way years before. And
the next day I again saw you there, at the service; I waited about the
entrance only to see you. I cared enough for you then to conceive a
design which for a long time seemed too hateful really to be carried
out, but--at last it was, you see.

Sidwell breathed quickly. Nothing he could have urged for himself would
have affected her more deeply than this. To date back and extend the
period of his love for her was a flattery more subtle than Peak
imagined.

'Why didn't you tell me that the day before yesterday?' she asked, with
tremulous bosom.

'I had no wish to remind myself of baseness in the midst of a pure joy.'

She was silent, then exclaimed, in accents of pain:

'Why should you have thought it necessary to be other than yourself?
Couldn't you see, at first meeting with us, that we were not bigoted
people? Didn't you know that Buckland had accustomed us to understand
how common it is nowadays for people to throw off the old religion?
Would father have looked coldly on you if he had known that you
followed where so many good and thoughtful men were leading?'

He regarded her anxiously.

'I had heard from Buckland that your father was strongly prejudiced;
that you also were quite out of sympathy with the new thought.'

'He exaggerated--even then.'

'Exaggerated? But on what plea could I have come to live in this
neighbourhood? How could I have kept you in sight--tried to win your
interest? I had no means, no position. The very thought of encouraging
my love for you demanded some extraordinary step. What course was open
to me?'

Sidwell let her head droop.

'I don't know. You might perhaps have discovered a way.'

'But what was the use, when the mere fact of my heresy would have
forbidden hope from the outset?'

'Why should it have done so?'

'Why? You know very well that you could never even have been friendly
with the man who wrote that thing in the review.'

'But here is the proof how much better it is to behave truthfully! In
this last year I have changed so much that I find it difficult to
understand the strength of my former prejudices. What is it to me now
that you speak scornfully of attempts to reconcile things that can't be
reconciled? I understand the new thought, and how natural it is for you
to accept it. If only I could have come to know you well, your opinions
would not have stood between us.'

Peak made a slight gesture, and smiled incredulously.

'You think so now.'

'And I have such good reason for my thought,' rejoined Sidwell,
earnestly, 'that when you said you loved me, my only regret in looking
to the future was--that you had resolved to be a clergyman.'

He leaned back in the chair, and let a hand fall on his knee. The
gesture seemed to signify a weary relinquishment of concern in what
they were discussing.

'How could I foresee that?' he uttered, in a corresponding tone.

Sidwell was made uneasy by the course upon which she had entered. To
what did her words tend? If only to a demonstration that fate had used
him as the plaything of its irony--if, after all, she had nothing to
say to him but 'See how your own folly has ruined you', then she had
better have kept silence. She not only appeared to be offering him
encouragement, but was in truth doing so. She wished him to understand
that his way of thinking was no obstacle to her love, and with that
purpose she was even guilty of a slight misrepresentation. For it was
only since the shock of this disaster that she had clearly recognised
the change in her own mind. True, the regret of which she spoke had for
an instant visited her, but it represented a mundane solicitude rather
than an intellectual scruple. It had occurred to her how much brighter
would be their prospect if Peak were but an active man of the world,
with a career before him distinctly suited to his powers.

His contention was undeniably just. The influence to which she had from
the first submitted was the same that her father felt so strongly.
Godwin interested her as a self-reliant champion of the old faiths, and
his personal characteristics would never have awakened such sympathy in
her but for that initial recommendation. Natural prejudice would have
prevented her from perceiving the points of kindred between his
temperament and her own. His low origin, the ridiculous stories
connected with his youth--why had she, in spite of likelihood, been
able to disregard these things? Only because of what she then deemed
his spiritual value.

But for the dishonourable part he had played, this bond of love would
never have been formed between them. The thought was a new apology for
his transgression; she could not but defy her conscience, and look
indulgently on the evil which had borne such fruit.

Godwin had begun to speak again.

'This is quite in keeping with the tenor of my whole life. Whatever I
undertake ends in frustration at a point where success seems to have
just come within my reach. Great things and trifles--it's all the same.
My course at College was broken off at the moment when I might have
assured my future. Later, I made many an effort to succeed in
literature, and when at length something of mine was printed in a
leading review, I could not even sign it, and had no profit from the
attention it excited. Now--well, you see. Laughable, isn't it?'

Sidwell scarcely withheld herself from bending forward and giving him
her hand.

'What shall you do?' she asked.

'Oh, I am not afraid. I have still enough money left to support me
until I can find some occupation of the old kind. Fortunately, I am not
one of those men whose brains have no marketable value.'

'If you knew how it pains me to hear you!'

'If I didn't believe that, I couldn't speak to you like this. I never
thought you would let me see you again, and if you hadn't asked me to
come, I could never have brought myself to face you. But it would have
been a miserable thing to go off without even knowing what you thought
of me.'

'Should you never have written to me?'

'I think not. You find it hard to imagine that I have any pride, no
doubt; but it is there, explain it how one may.'

'It would have been wrong to leave me in such uncertainty.'

'Uncertainty?'

'About you--about your future.'

'Did you quite mean that? Hadn't your brother made you doubt whether I
loved you at all?'

'Yes. But no, I didn't doubt. Indeed, indeed, I didn't doubt! But I
felt such a need of hearing from your own lips that--Oh, I can't
explain myself!'

Godwin smiled sadly.

'I think I understand. But there was every reason for my believing that
_your_ love could not bear such a test. You must regard me as quite a
different man--one utterly unknown to you.'

He had resolved to speak not a word that could sound like an appeal to
her emotions. When he entered the room he felt a sincere indifference
as to what would result from the interview, for to his mind the story
was ended, and he had only to retire with the dignity still possible to
a dishonoured man. To touch the note of pathos would be unworthy; to
exert what influence might be left to him, a wanton cruelty. But he had
heard such unexpected things, that it was not easy for him to remember
how complete had seemed the severance between him and Sidwell. The
charm of her presence was reasserting itself, and when avowal of
continued love appeared so unmistakably in her troubled countenance,
her broken words, he could not control the answering fervour. He spoke
in a changed voice, and allowed his eyes to dwell longingly upon hers.

'I felt so at first,' she answered. 'And it would be wrong to pretend
that I can still regard you as I did before.'

It cost her a great effort to add these words. When they were spoken,
she was at once glad and fearful.

'I am not so foolish, as to think it possible,' said Peak, half turning
away.

'But that is no reason,' she pursued, 'why we should become strangers.
You are still so young a man; life must be so full of possibilities for
you. This year has been wasted, but when you leave Exeter'----

An impatient movement of Godwin's checked her.

'You are going to encourage me to begin the struggle once more,' he
said, bitterly. 'Where? How? It is so easy to talk of "possibilities".'

'You are not without friends--I mean friends whose sympathy is of real
value to you.'

Saying this, she looked keenly at him.

'Friends,' he replied, 'who perhaps at this moment are laughing over my
disgrace.'

'How do they know of--what has happened?'

'How did your brother get his information? I didn't care to ask
him.--No, I don't even wish you to say anything about that.'

'But surely there is no reason for keeping it secret. Why may I not
speak freely? Buckland told me that he had heard you spoken of at the
house of people named Moxey.'

She endeavoured to understand the smile which rose to his lips. 'Now it
is clear to me,' he said. 'Yes, I suppose that was inevitable, sooner
or later.'

'You knew that he had become acquainted with the Moxeys?'

Her tone was more reserved than hitherto.

'Yes, I knew he had. He met Miss Moxey by chance at Budleigh Salterton,
and I happened to be there--at the Moorhouses'--on the same day.'

Sidwell glanced at him inquiringly, and waited for something more.

'I saw Miss Moxey in private,' he added, speaking more quickly, 'and
asked her to keep my secret. I ought to be ashamed to tell you this,
but it is better you should know how far my humiliation has gone.'

He saw that she was moved with strong feeling. The low tone in which
she answered had peculiar significance.

'Did you speak of me to Miss Moxey?'

'I must forgive you for asking that,' Peak replied, coldly. 'It may
well seem to you that I have neither honour nor delicacy left.'

There had come a flush on her cheeks. For some moments she was absorbed
in thought.

'It seems strange to you,' he continued at length, 'that I could ask
Miss Moxey to share such a secret. But you must understand on what
terms we were--she and I. We have known each other for several years.
She has a man's mind, and I have always thought of her in much the same
way as of my male companions.--Your brother has told you about her,
perhaps?'

'I have met her in London.'

'Then that will make my explanation easier,' said Godwin, disregarding
the anxious questions that at once suggested themselves to him. 'Well,
I misled her, or tried to do so. I allowed her to suppose that I was
sincere in my new undertakings, and that I didn't wish--Oh!' he
exclaimed, suddenly breaking off, 'Why need I go any further in
confession? It must be as miserable for you to hear as for me to speak.
Let us make an end of it. I can't understand how I have escaped
detection so long.'

Remembering every detail of Buckland's story, Sidwell felt that she had
possibly been unjust in representing the Moxeys as her brother's
authority; in strictness, she ought to mention that a friend of theirs
was the actual source of information. But she could not pursue the
subject; like Godwin, she wished to put it out of her mind. What
question could there be of honour or dishonour in the case of a person
such as Miss Moxey, who had consented to be party to a shameful deceit?
Strangely, it was a relief to her to have heard this. The moral
repugnance which threatened to estrange her from Godwin, was now
directed in another quarter; unduly restrained by love, it found scope
under the guidance of jealousy.

'You have been trying to adapt yourself,' she said, 'to a world for
which you are by nature unfitted. Your place is in the new order; by
turning back to the old, you condemned yourself to a wasted life. Since
we have been in London, I have come to understand better the great
difference between modern intellectual life and that which we lead in
these far-away corners. You must go out among your equals, go and take
your part with men who are working for the future.'

Peak rose with a gesture of passionate impatience.

'What is it to me, new world or old? My world is where _you_ are. I
have no life of my own; I think only of you, live only by you.'

'If I could help you!' she replied, with emotion. 'What can I do--but
be your friend at a distance? Everything else has become impossible.'

'Impossible for the present--for a long time to come. But is there no
hope for me?'

She pressed her hands together, and stood before him unable to answer.
'Remember,' he continued, 'that you are almost as much changed in my
eyes as I in yours. I did not imagine that you had moved so far towards
freedom of mind. If my love for you was profound and absorbing, think
what it must now have become! Yours has suffered by my disgrace, but is
there no hope of its reviving--if I live worthily--if I----?'

His voice failed.

'I have said that we can't be strangers,' Sidwell murmured brokenly.
'Wherever you go, I must hear of you.'

'Everyone about you will detest my name. You will soon wish to forget
my existence.'

'If I know myself, never!--Oh, try to find your true work! You have
such abilities, powers so much greater than those of ordinary men. You
will always be the same to me, and if ever circumstances'----

'You would have to give up so much, Sidwell. And there is little chance
of my ever being well-to-do; poverty will always stand between us, if
nothing else.'

'It must be so long before we can think of that.'

'But can I ever see you?--No, I won't ask that. Who knows? I may have
to go too far away. But I _may_ write to you--after a time?'

'I shall live in the hope of good news from you,' she replied, trying
to smile and to speak cheerfully. 'This will always be my home. Nothing
will be changed.'

'Then you don't think of me as irredeemably base?'

'If I thought you base,' Sidwell answered, in a low voice, 'I should
not now be speaking with you. It is because I feel and know that you
have erred only--that is what makes it impossible for me to think of
your fault as outweighing the good in your nature.'

'The good? I wonder how you understand that. What is there _good_ in
me? You don't mean mere intellect?'

He waited anxiously for what she would say. A necessity for speaking
out his inmost thoughts had arisen with the emotion, scarcely to be
called hope, excited by Sidwell's magnanimity. Now, or never, he must
stand before this woman as his very self, and be convinced that she
loved him for his own sake.

'No, I don't mean intellect,' she replied, with hesitation.

'What then? Tell me of one quality in me strong enough to justify a
woman's love.'

Sidwell dropped her eyes in confusion.

'I can't analyse your character--I only know'----

She became silent.

'To myself,' pursued Godwin, with the modulated, moving voice which
always expressed his genuine feeling, 'I seem anything but lovable. I
don't underrate my powers--rather the opposite, no doubt; but what I
always seem to lack is the gift of pleasing--moral grace. My strongest
emotions seem to be absorbed in revolt; for once that I feel tenderly,
I have a hundred fierce, resentful, tempestuous moods. To be suave and
smiling in common intercourse costs me an effort. I have to act the
part, and this habit makes me sceptical, whenever I am really prompted
to gentleness. I criticise myself ceaselessly; expose without mercy all
those characteristics which another man would keep out of sight. Yes,
and for this very reason, just because I think myself unlovable--the
gift of love means far more to me than to other men. If you could
conceive the passion of gratitude which possessed me for hours after I
left you the other day! You cannot!'

Sidwell regarded him fixedly.

'In comparison with this sincerity, what becomes of the pretence you
blame in me? If you knew how paltry it seems--that accusation of
dishonesty! I believed the world round, and pretended to believe it
flat: that's what it amounts to! Are you, on such an account as that,
to consider worthless the devotion which has grown in me month by
month? You--I was persuaded--thought the world flat, and couldn't think
kindly of any man who held the other hypothesis. Very well; why not
concede the trifle, and so at least give myself a chance? I did
so--that was all.'

In vain her conscience strove to assert itself. She was under the spell
of a nature infinitely stronger than hers; she saw and felt as Godwin
did.

'You think, Sidwell, that I stand in need of forgiveness. Then be great
enough to forgive me, wholly--once and for all. Let your love be
strengthened by the trial it has passed through. That will mean that my
whole life is yours, directed by the ever-present thought of your
beauty, face and soul. Then there _will_ be good in me, thanks to you.
I shall no longer live a life of hypocrisy, of suppressed rage and
scorn. I know how much I am asking; perhaps it means that for my sake
you give up everything else that is dear to you'----

The thought checked him. He looked at her despondently.

'You can trust me,' Sidwell answered, moving nearer to him, tears on
her cheeks. 'I must hear from you, and I will write.'

'I can ask no more than that.'

He took her hands, held them for a moment, and turned away. At the door
he looked round. Sidwell's head was bowed, and, on her raising it, he
saw that she was blinded with tears.

So he went forth.