CHAPTER III


Peak lost no time in leaving Exeter. To lighten his baggage, and to get
rid of possessions to which hateful memories attached, he sold all his
books that had any bearing on theology. The incomplete translation of
_Bibel und Natur_ he committed to the flames in Mrs Roots's kitchen,
scattering its black remnants with savage thrusts of the poker. Whilst
engaged in packing, he debated with himself whether or not he should
take leave of the few acquaintances to whom he was indebted for
hospitality and other kindness. The question was: Had Buckland
Warricombe already warned these people against him? Probably it had
seemed to Buckland the wiser course to be content with driving the
hypocrite away; and, if this were so, regard for the future dictated a
retirement from Exeter which should in no way resemble secret flight.
Sidwell's influence with her parents would perhaps withhold them from
making his disgrace known, and in a few years he might be glad that he
had behaved with all possible prudence. In the end, he decided to write
to Mr. Lilywhite, saying that he was obliged to go away at a moment's
notice, and that he feared it would be necessary altogether to change
the scheme of life which he had had in view. This was the best way.
From the Lilywhites, other people would hear of him, and perchance
their conjectures would be charitable.

Without much hesitation he had settled his immediate plans. To London
he would not return, for he dreaded the temptations to which the
proximity of Sidwell would expose him, and he had no mind to meet with
Moxey or Earwaker. As it was now imperative that he should find work of
the old kind, he could not do better than go to Bristol, where, from
the safe ground of a cheap and obscure lodging, he might make
inquiries, watch advertisements, and so on. He already knew of
establishments in Bristol where he might possibly obtain employment.
Living with the utmost economy, he need not fall into difficulties for
more than a year, and before then his good repute with the Rotherhithe
firm would ensure him some position or other; if not in Bristol, then
at Newcastle, St. Helen's--any great centre of fuming and malodorous
industry. He was ready to work, would delight in work. Idleness was now
the intolerable thing.

So to Bristol he betook himself, and there made his temporary abode.
After spending a few weeks in fruitless search for an engagement, he at
length paid his oft-postponed visit to Twybridge. In the old home he
felt completely a stranger, and his relatives strengthened the feeling
by declaring him so changed in appearance that they hardly knew his
face. With his mother only could he talk in anything like an intimate
way, and the falsehoods with which he was obliged to answer her
questions all but destroyed the pleasure he would otherwise have found
in being affectionately tended. His sister, Mrs Cusse, was happy in her
husband, her children, and a flourishing business. Oliver was making
money, and enjoyed distinction among the shopkeeping community. His
aunt still dealt in millinery, and kept up her acquaintance with
respectable families. To Godwin all was like a dream dreamt for the
second time. He could not acknowledge any actual connection between
these people and himself. But their characteristics no longer gravely
offended him, and he willingly recognised the homespun worth which
their lives displayed. It was clear to him that by no possible agency
of circumstances could he have been held in normal relations with his
kinsfolk. However smooth his career, it must have wafted him to an
immeasurable distance from Twybridge. Nature had decreed that he was to
resemble the animals which, once reared, go forth in complete
independence of birthplace and the ties of blood. It was a harsh fate,
but in what had not fate been harsh to him? The one consolation was
that he alone suffered. His mother was no doubt occasionally troubled
by solicitude on his account, but she could not divine his inward
miseries, and an assurance that he had no material cares sufficed to
set her mind at ease.

'You are very like your father, Godwin,' she said, with a sigh. 'He
couldn't rest, however well he seemed to be getting on. There was
always something he wanted, and yet he didn't know what it was.'

'Yes, I must be like him,' Godwin replied, smiling.

He stayed five days, then returned to Bristol. A week after that, his
mother forwarded to him a letter which had come to Twybridge. He at
once recognised the writing, and broke the envelope with curiosity.

'If you should be in London [the note began], I beg you to let me see
you. There is something I have to say. To speak to you for a few
minutes I would come any distance. Don't accuse me of behaving
treacherously; it was not my fault. I know you would rather avoid me,
but do consent to hear what I have to say. If you have no intention of
coming to London, will you write and let me know where you are living?

What could Marcella have to say to him? Nothing surely that he at all
cared to hear. No doubt she imagined that he might be in ignorance of
the circumstances which had led to Buckland Warricombe's discovery; she
wished to defend herself against the suspicion of 'treachery'. He
laughed carelessly, and threw her note aside.

Two months passed, and his efforts to find employment were still vain,
though he had received conditional promises. The solitude of his life
grew burdensome. Several times he began a letter to Sidwell, but his
difficulty in writing was so great that he destroyed the attempt. In
truth, he knew not how to address her. The words he penned were tumid,
meaningless. He could not send professions of love, for his heart
seemed to be suffering a paralysis, and the laborious artificiality of
his style must have been evident. The only excuse for breaking silence
would be to let her know that he had resumed honest work; he must wait
till the opportunity offered. It did not distress him to be without
news of her. If she wished to write, and was only withheld by ignorance
of his whereabouts, it was well; if she had no thought of sending him a
word, it did not matter. He loved her, and consciously nourished hope,
but for the present there was nothing intolerable in separation. His
state of mind resulted partly from nervous reaction, and in part from a
sense that only by silent suffering could his dignity in Sidwell's eyes
be ultimately restored. Between the evil past and the hopeful future
must be a complete break.

His thoughts kept turning to London, though not because Sidwell might
still be there. He felt urgent need of speaking with a friend. Moxey
was perhaps no longer to be considered one; but Earwaker would be
tolerant of human weaknesses. To have a long talk with Earwaker would
help him to recover his mental balance, to understand himself and his
position better. So one morning in March, on the spur of the moment, he
took train and was once more in the metropolis. On his way he had
determined to send a note to Earwaker before calling at Staple Inn. He
wrote it at a small hotel in Paddington, where he took a room for the
night, and then spent the evening at a theatre, as the best way of
killing time.

By the first post next morning came a card, whereon Earwaker had
written: 'Be here, if you can, at two o'clock. Shall be glad to see
you.'

'So you have been new-furnishing!' Godwin remarked, as he was admitted
to the chambers. 'You look much more comfortable.'

'I'm glad you think so. It is the general opinion.'

They had shaken hands as though this were one of the ordinary meetings
of old time, and their voices scarcely belied the appearance. Peak
moved about the study, glancing at pictures and books, Earwaker eyeing
him the while with not unfriendly expression. They were sincerely glad
to see each other, and when Peak seated himself it was with an audible
sigh of contentment.

'And what are you doing?' he inquired.

The journalist gave a brief account of his affairs, and Peak brightened
with pleasure.

'This is good news. I knew you would shake off the ragamuffins before
long. Give me some of your back numbers, will you? I shall be curious
to examine your new style.'

'And you?--Come to live in London?'

'No; I am at Bristol, but only waiting. There's a chance of an
analyst's place in Lancashire; but I may give the preference to an
opening I have heard of in Belgium. Better to go abroad, I think.'

'Perhaps so.'

'I have a question to ask you. I suppose you talked about that
_Critical_ article of mine _before_ you received my request for
silence?'

'That's how it was,' Earwaker replied, calmly.

'Yes; I understood. It doesn't matter.'

The other puffed at his pipe, and moved uneasily.

'I am taking for granted,' Peak continued, 'that you know how I have
spent my time down in Devonshire.'

'In outline. Need we trouble about the details?'

'No. But don't suppose that I should feel any shame in talking to you
about them. That would be a confession of base motive. You and I have
studied each other, and we can exchange thoughts on most subjects with
mutual understanding. You know that I have only followed my convictions
to their logical issue. An opportunity offered of achieving the supreme
end to which my life is directed, and what scruple could stand in my
way? We have nothing to do with names and epithets. _Here_ are the
facts of life as I had known it; _there_ is the existence promised as
the reward of successful artifice. To live was to pursue the object of
my being. I could not feel otherwise; therefore, could not act
otherwise. You imagine me defeated, flung back into the gutter.' His
words came more quickly, and the muscles of his face worked under
emotion. 'It isn't so. I have a great and reasonable hope. Perhaps I
have gained everything I really desired. I could tell you the strangest
story, but there a scruple _does_ interpose. If we live another twenty
years--but now I can only talk about myself.'

'And this hope of which you speak,' said Earwaker, with a grave smile,
'points you at present to sober work among your retorts and test-tubes?'

'Yes, it does.'

'Good. Then I can put faith in the result.'

'Yet the hope began in a lie,' rejoined Peak, bitterly. 'It will always
be pleasant to look back upon that, won't it? You see: by no
conceivable honest effort could I have gained this point. Life utterly
denied to me the satisfaction of my strongest instincts, so long as I
plodded on without cause of shame; the moment I denied my faith, and
put on a visage of brass, great possibilities opened before me. Of
course I understand the moralist's position. It behoved me, though I
knew that a barren and solitary track would be my only treading to the
end, to keep courageously onward. If I can't _believe_ that any such
duty is imposed upon me, where is the obligation to persevere, the
morality of doing so? That is the worst hypocrisy. I have been honest,
inasmuch as I have acted in accordance with my actual belief.'

'M--m--m,' muttered Earwaker, slowly. 'Then you have never been
troubled with a twinge of conscience?'

'With a thousand! I have been racked, martyred. What has that to do
with it? Do you suppose I attach any final significance to those
torments? Conscience is the same in my view as an inherited disease
which may possibly break out on any most innocent physical
indulgence.--What end have I been pursuing? Is it criminal? Is it mean?
I wanted to win the love of a woman--nothing more. To do that, I have
had to behave like the grovelling villain who has no desire but to fill
his pockets. And with success!--You understand that, Earwaker? I have
succeeded! What respect can I have for the common morality, after this?'

'You have succeeded?' the other asked, thoughtfully. 'I could have
imagined that you had been in appearance successful'----

He paused, and Peak resumed with vehemence:

'No, not in appearance only. I can't tell you the story'----

'I don't wish you to'----

'But what I have won is won for ever. The triumph no longer rests on
deceit. What I insist upon is that by deceit only was it rendered
possible. If a starving man succeeds in stealing a loaf of bread, the
food will benefit him no less than if he had purchased it; it is good,
true sustenance, no matter how he got it. To be sure, the man may
prefer starvation; he may have so strong a metaphysical faith that
death is welcome in comparison with what he calls dishonour. I--I have
no such faith; and millions of other men in this country would tell the
blunt truth if they said the same. I have _used means_, that's all. The
old way of candour led me to bitterness and cursing; by dissimulation I
have won something more glorious than tongue can tell.'

It was in the endeavour to expel the subtlest enemy of his peace that
Godwin dwelt so defiantly upon this view of the temptation to which he
had yielded. Since his farewell interview with Sidwell, he knew no rest
from the torment of a mocking voice which bade him bear in mind that
all his dishonour had been superfluous, seeing that whilst he played
the part of a zealous Christian, Sidwell herself was drifting further
and further from the old religion. This voice mingled with his dreams,
and left not a waking hour untroubled. He refused to believe it, strove
against the suggestion as a half-despairing man does against the
persistent thought of suicide. If only he could obtain Earwaker's
assent to the plan he put forward, it would support him in disregard of
idle regrets.

'It is impossible,' said the journalist, 'for anyone to determine
whether that is true or not--for you, as much as for anyone else. Be
glad that you have shaken off the evil and retained the good, no use in
saying more than that.'

'Yes,' declared the other, stubbornly, 'there is good in exposing false
views of life. I ought to have come utterly to grief and shame, and
instead'----

'Instead----? Well?'

'What I have told you.'

'Which I interpret thus: that you have permission to redeem your
character, if possible, in the eyes of a woman you have grievously
misled.'

Godwin frowned.

'Who suggested this to you, Earwaker?'

'You; no one else. I don't even know who the woman is of whom you
speak.'

'Grant you are right. As an honest man, I should never have won her
faintest interest.'

'It is absurd for us to talk about it. Think in the way that is most
helpful to you,--that, no doubt, is a reasonable rule. Let us have done
with all these obscurities, and come to a practical question. Can I be
of any use to you? Would you care, for instance, to write an article
now and then on some scientific matter that has a popular interest? I
think I could promise to get that kind of thing printed for you. Or
would you review an occasional book that happened to be in your line?'

Godwin reflected.

'Thank you,' he replied, at length. 'I should be glad of such work--if
I can get into the mood for doing it properly. That won't be just yet;
but perhaps when I have found a place'----

'Think it over. Write to me about it.'

Peak glanced round the room.

'You don't know how glad I am,' he said, 'that your prosperity shows
itself in this region of bachelordom. If I had seen you in a
comfortable house, married to a woman worthy of you--I couldn't have
been sincere in my congratulations: I should have envied you so
fiercely.'

'You're a strange fellow. Twenty years hence--as you said just now--you
will one way or another have got rid of your astounding illusions. At
fifty--well, let us say at sixty--you will have a chance of seeing
things without these preposterous sexual spectacles.'

'I hope so. Every stage of life has its powers and enjoyments. When I
am old, I hope to perceive and judge without passion of any kind. But
is that any reason why my youth should be frustrated? We have only one
life, and I want to live mine throughout.'

Soon after this Peak rose. He remembered that the journalist's time was
valuable, and that he no longer had the right to demand more of it than
could be granted to any casual caller. Earwaker behaved with all
friendliness, but their relations had necessarily suffered a change.
More than a year of separation, spent by the one in accumulating
memories of dishonour, had given the other an enviable position among
men; Earwaker had his place in the social system, his growing circle of
friends, his congenial labour; perhaps--notwithstanding the tone in
which he spoke of marriage--his hopes of domestic happiness. All this
with no sacrifice of principle. He was fortunate in his temper, moral
and intellectual; partly directing circumstances, partly guided by
their pressure, he advanced on the way of harmonious development.
Nothing great would come of his endeavours, but what he aimed at he
steadily perfected. And this in spite of the adverse conditions under
which he began his course. Nature had been kind to him; what more could
one say?

When he went forth into the street again, Godwin felt his heart sink.
His solitude was the more complete for this hour of friendly dialogue.
No other companionship offered itself; if he lingered here, it must be
as one of the drifting crowd, as an idle and envious spectator of the
business and pleasure rife about him. He durst not approach that
quarter of the town where Sidwell was living--if indeed she still
remained here. Happily, the vastness of London enabled him to think of
her as at a great distance; by keeping to the district in which he now
wandered he was practically as remote from her as when he walked the
streets of Bristol.

Yet there was one person who would welcome him eagerly if he chose to
visit her. And, after all, might it not be as well if he heard what
Marcella had to say to him? He could not go to the house, for it would
be disagreeable to encounter Moxey; but, if he wrote, Marcella would
speedily make an appointment. After an hour or two of purposeless
rambling, he decided to ask for an interview. He might learn something
that really concerned him; in any case, it was a final meeting with
Marcella, to whom he perhaps owed this much courtesy.

The reply was as prompt as that from Earwaker. By the morning post came
a letter inviting him to call upon Miss Moxey as soon as possible
before noon. She added, 'My brother is away in the country; you will
meet no one here.'

By eleven o'clock he was at Notting Hill; in the drawing-room, he sat
alone for two or three minutes. Marcella entered silently, and came
towards him without a smile; he saw that she read his face eagerly, if
not with a light of triumph in her eyes. The expression might signify
that she rejoiced at having been an instrument of his discomfiture;
perhaps it was nothing more than gladness at seeing him again.

'Have you come to live in London?' she asked, when they had shaken
hands without a word.

'I am only here for a day or two.'

'My letter reached you without delay?'

'Yes. It was sent from Twybridge to Bristol. I didn't reply then, as I
had no prospect of being in London.'

'Will you sit down? You can stay for a few minutes?'

He seated himself awkwardly. Now that he was in Marcella's presence, he
felt that he had acted unaccountably in giving occasion for another
scene between them which could only end as painfully as that at Exeter.
Her emotion grew evident; he could not bear to meet the look she had
fixed upon him.

'I want to speak of what happened in this house about Christmas time,'
she resumed. 'But I must know first what you have been told.'

'What have _you_ been told?' he replied, with an uneasy smile. 'How do
you know that anything which happened here had any importance for me?'

'I don't know that it had. But I felt sure that Mr. Warricombe meant to
speak to you about it.'

'Yes, he did.'

'But did he tell you the exact truth? Or were you led to suppose that I
had broken my promise to you?'

Unwilling to introduce any mention of Sidwell, Peak preferred to
simplify the story by attributing to Buckland all the information he
had gathered.

'I understood,' he replied, 'that Warricombe had come here in the hope
of learning more about me, and that certain facts came out in general
conversation. What does it matter how he learned what he did? From the
day when he met you down in Devonshire, it was of course inevitable
that the truth should sooner or later come out. He always suspected me.'

'But I want you to know,' said Marcella, 'that I had no willing part in
it. I promised you not to speak even to my brother, and I should never
have done so but that Christian somehow met Mr. Warricombe, and heard
him talk of you. Of course he came to me in astonishment, and for your
own interest I thought it best to tell Christian what I knew. When Mr.
Warricombe came here, neither Christian nor I would have enlightened
him about--about your past. It happened most unfortunately that Mr.
Malkin was present, and he it was who began to speak of the _Critical_
article--and other things. I was powerless to prevent it.'

'Why trouble about it? I quite believe your account.'

'You _do_ believe it? You know I would not have injured you?'

'I am sure you had no wish to,' Godwin replied, in as unsentimental a
tone as possible. And, he added after a moment's pause, 'Was this what
you were so anxious to tell me?'

'Yes. Chiefly that.'

'Let me put your mind at rest,' pursued the other, with quiet
friendliness. 'I am disposed to turn optimist; everything has happened
just as it should have done. Warricombe relieved me from a false
position. If _he_ hadn't done so, I must very soon have done it for
myself. Let us rejoice that things work together for such obvious good.
A few more lessons of this kind, and we shall acknowledge that the
world is the best possible.'

He laughed, but the tense expression of Marcella's features did not
relax.

'You say you are living in Bristol?'

'For a time.'

'Have you abandoned Exeter?'

The word implied something that Marcella could not utter more plainly.
Her face completed the question.

'And the clerical career as well,' he answered.

But he knew that she sought more than this, and his voice again broke
the silence.

'Perhaps you have heard that already? Are you in communication with
Miss Moorhouse?'

She shook her head.

'But probably Warricombe has told your brother----?'

'What?'

'Oh, of his success in ridding Exeter of my objectionable presence.'

'Christian hasn't seen him again, nor have I.'

'I only wish to assure you that I have suffered no injury. My
experiment was doomed to failure. What led me to it, how I regarded it,
we won't discuss; I am as little prepared to do so now as when we
talked at Exeter. That chapter in my life is happily over. As soon as I
am established again in a place like that I had at Rotherhithe, I shall
be quite contented.'

'Contented?' She smiled incredulously. 'For how long?'

'Who can say? I have lost the habit of looking far forward.'

Marcella kept silence so long that he concluded she had nothing more to
say to him. It was an opportunity for taking leave without emotional
stress, and he rose from his chair.

'Don't go yet,' she said at once. 'It wasn't only this that I'----

Her voice was checked.

'Can I be of any use to you in Bristol?' Peak asked, determined to
avoid the trial he saw approaching.

'There is something more I wanted to say,' she pursued, seeming not to
hear him. 'You pretend to be contented, but I know that is impossible.
You talk of going back to a dull routine of toil, when what you most
desire is freedom. I want--if I can--to help you.'

Again she failed to command her voice. Godwin raised his eyes, and was
astonished at the transformation she had suddenly undergone. Her face,
instead of being colourless and darkly vehement, had changed to a
bright warmth, a smiling radiance such as would have become a happy
girl. His look seemed to give her courage.

'Only hear me patiently. We are such old friends--are we not? We have
so often proclaimed our scorn of conventionality, and why should a
conventional fear hinder what I want to say? You know--don't you?--that
I have far more money than I need or am ever likely to. I want only a
few hundreds a year, and I have more than a thousand.' She spoke more
and more quickly, fearful of being interrupted. 'Why shouldn't I give
you some of my superfluity? Let me help you in this way. Money can do
so much. Take some from me, and use it as you will--just as you will.
It is useless to _me_. Why shouldn't someone whom I wish well benefit
by it?'

Godwin was not so much surprised as disconcerted. He knew that
Marcella's nature was of large mould, and that whether she acted for
good or evil its promptings would be anything but commonplace. The
ardour with which she pleaded, and the magnitude of the benefaction she
desired to bestow upon him, so affected his imagination that for the
moment he stood as if doubting what reply to make. The doubt really in
his mind was whether Marcella had calculated upon his weakness, and
hoped to draw him within her power by the force of such an obligation,
or if in truth she sought only to appease her heart with the exercise
of generosity.

'You will let me?' she panted forth, watching him with brilliant eyes.
'This shall be a secret for ever between you and me. It imposes no debt
of gratitude--how I despise the thought! I give you what is worthless
to me,--except that it can do _you_ good. But you can thank me if you
will. I am not above being thanked.' She laughed unnaturally. 'Go and
travel at first, as you wished to. Write me a short letter every
month--every two months, just that I may know you are enjoying your
life. It is agreed, isn't it?'

She held her hand to him, but Peak drew away, his face averted.

'How can you give me the pain of refusing such an offer?' he exclaimed,
with remonstrance which was all but anger. 'You know the thing is
utterly impossible. I should be ridiculous if I argued about it for a
moment.'

'I can't see that it is impossible.'

'Then you must take my word for it. But I have no right to speak to you
in that way,' he added, more kindly, seeing the profound humiliation
which fell upon her. 'You meant to come to my aid at a time when I
seemed to you lonely and miserable. It was a generous impulse, and I do
indeed thank you. I shall always remember it and be grateful to you.'

Marcella's face was again in shadow. Its lineaments hardened to an
expression of cold, stern dignity.

'I have made a mistake,' she said. 'I thought you above common ways of
thinking.'

'Yes, you put me on too high a pedestal,' Peak answered, trying to
speak humorously. 'One of my faults is that I am apt to mistake my own
position in the same way.'

'You think yourself ambitious. Oh, if you knew really great ambition!
Go back to your laboratory, and work for wages. I would have saved you
from that.'

The tone was not vehement, but the words bit all the deeper for their
unimpassioned accent. Godwin could make no reply.

'I hope,' she continued, 'we may meet a few years hence. By that time
you will have learnt that what I offered was not impossible. You will
wish you had dared to accept it. I know what your _ambition_ is. Wait
till you are old enough to see it in its true light. How you will scorn
yourself! Surely there was never a man who united such capacity for
great things with so mean an ideal. You will never win even the paltry
satisfaction on which you have set your mind--never! But you can't be
made to understand that. You will throw away all the best part of your
life. Meet me in a few years, and tell me the story of the interval.'

'I will engage to do that, Marcella.'

'You will? But not to tell me the truth. You will not dare to tell the
truth.'

'Why not?' he asked, indifferently. 'Decidedly I shall owe it you in
return for your frankness to-day. Till then--good-bye.'

She did not refuse her hand, and as he moved away she watched him with
a smile of slighting good-nature.

On the morrow Godwin was back in Bristol, and there he dwelt for
another six months, a period of mental and physical lassitude. Earwaker
corresponded with him, and urged him to attempt the work that had been
proposed, but such effort was beyond his power.

He saw one day in a literary paper an announcement that Reusch's _Bibel
und Natur_ was about to be published in an English translation. So
someone else had successfully finished the work he undertook nearly two
years ago. He amused himself with the thought that he could ever have
persevered so long in such profitless labour, and with a contemptuous
laugh he muttered '_Thohu wabohu_.'

Just when the winter had set in, he received an offer of a post in
chemical works at St. Helen's, and without delay travelled northwards.
The appointment was a poor one, and seemed unlikely to be a step to
anything better, but his resources would not last more than another
half year, and employment of whatever kind came as welcome relief to
the tedium of his existence. Established in his new abode, he at length
wrote to Sidwell. She answered him at once in a short letter which he
might have shown to anyone, so calm were its expressions of interest,
so uncompromising its words of congratulation. It began 'Dear Mr.
Peak', and ended with 'Yours sincerely'. Well, he had used the same
formalities, and had uttered his feelings with scarcely more of warmth.
Disappointment troubled him for a moment, and for a moment only. He was
so far from Exeter, and further still from the life that he had led
there. It seemed to him all but certain that Sidwell wrote coldly, with
the intention of discouraging his hopes. What hope was he so foolish as
to entertain? His position poorer than ever, what could justify him in
writing love-letters to a girl who, even if willing to marry him, must
not do so until he had a suitable home to offer her?

Since his maturity, he had never known so long a freedom from passion.
One day he wrote to Earwaker: 'I begin to your independence with regard
to women. It would be a strange thing if I became a convert to that way
of thinking, but once or twice of late I have imagined that it was
happening. My mind has all but recovered its tone, and I am able to
read, to think--I mean really to _think_, not to muse. I get through
big and solid books. Presently, if your offer still hold good, I shall
send you a scrap of writing on something or other. The pestilent
atmosphere of this place seems to invigorate me. Last Saturday evening
I took train, got away into the hills, and spent the Sunday
geologising. And a curious experience befell me,--one I had long, long
ago, in the Whitelaw days. Sitting down before some interesting strata,
I lost myself in something like nirvana, grew so subject to the idea of
vastness in geological time that all human desires and purposes
shrivelled to ridiculous unimportance. Awaking for a minute, I tried to
realise the passion which not long ago rent and racked me, but I was
flatly incapable of understanding it. Will this philosophic state
endure? Perhaps I have used up all my emotional energy? I hardly know
whether to hope or fear it.'

About midsummer, when his short holiday (he would only be released for
a fortnight) drew near, he was surprised by another letter from Sidwell.

'I am anxious [she wrote] to hear that you are well. It is more than
half a year since your last letter, and of late I have been constantly
expecting a few lines. The spring has been a time of trouble with us. A
distant relative, an old and feeble lady who has passed her life in a
little Dorsetshire village, came to see us in April, and in less than a
fortnight she was seized with illness and died. Then Fanny had an
attack of bronchitis, from which even now she is not altogether
recovered. On her account we are all going to Royat, and I think we
shall be away until the end of September. Will you let me hear from you
before I leave England, which will be in a week's time? Don't refrain
from writing because you think you have no news to send. Anything that
interests you is of interest to me. If it is only to tell me what you
have been reading, I shall be glad of a letter.'

It was still 'Yours sincerely'; but Godwin felt that the letter meant
more. In re-reading it he was pleasantly thrilled with a stirring of
the old emotions. But his first impulse, to write an ardent reply, did
not carry him away; he reflected and took counsel of the experience
gained in his studious solitude. It was evident that by keeping silence
he had caused Sidwell to throw off something of her reserve. The course
dictated by prudence was to maintain an attitude of dignity, to hold
himself in check. In this way he would regain what he had so
disastrously lost, Sidwell's respect. There was a distinct pleasure in
this exercise of self-command; it was something new to him; it
flattered his pride. 'Let her learn that, after all, I am her superior.
Let her fear to lose me. Then, if her love is still to be depended
upon, she will before long find a way to our union. It is in her power,
if only she wills it.'

So he sat down and wrote a short letter which seemed to him a model of
dignified expression.