CHAPTER II


In a by-way which declines from the main thoroughfare of Exeter, and
bears the name of Longbrook Street, is a row of small houses placed
above long strips of sloping garden. They are old and plain, with no
architectural feature calling for mention, unless it be the latticed
porch which gives the doors an awkward quaintness. Just beyond, the
road crosses a hollow, and begins the ascent of a hill here interposed
between the city and the inland-winding valley of Exe. The little
terrace may be regarded as urban or rural, according to the tastes and
occasions of those who dwell there. In one direction, a walk of five
minutes will conduct to the middle of High Street, and in the other it
takes scarcely longer to reach the open country.

On the upper floor of one of these cottages, Godwin Peak had made his
abode. Sitting-room and bedchamber, furnished with homely comfort,
answered to his bachelor needs, and would allow of his receiving
without embarrassment any visitor whom fortune might send him. Of
quietness he was assured, for a widow and her son, alike remarkable for
sobriety of demeanour, were the only persons who shared the house with
him. Mrs. Roots could not compare in grace and skill with the little
Frenchwoman who had sweetened his existence at Peckham Rye, but her
zeal made amends for natural deficiency, and the timorous respect with
which she waited upon him was by no means disagreeable to Godwin. Her
reply to a request or suggestion was always, 'If you please, sir.'
Throughout the day she went so tranquilly about her domestic duties,
that Godwin seldom heard anything except the voice of the cuckoo-clock,
a pleasant sound to him. Her son, employed at a nurseryman's, was a
great sinewy fellow with a face of such ruddiness that it seemed to
diffuse warmth; on Sunday afternoon, whatever the state of the sky, he
sat behind the house in his shirt-sleeves, and smoked a pipe as he
contemplated the hart's-tongue which grew there upon a rockery.

'The gentleman from London'--so Mrs. Roots was wont to style her lodger
in speaking with neighbours--had brought his books with him; they found
place on a few shelves. His microscope had its stand by the window, and
one or two other scientific implements lay about the room. The cabinets
bequeathed to him by Mr. Gunnery he had sent to Twybridge, to remain in
his mother's care. In taking the lodgings, he described himself merely
as a student, and gave his landlady to understand that he hoped to
remain under her roof for at least a year. Of his extreme
respectability, the widow could entertain no doubt, for he dressed with
aristocratic finish, attended services at the Cathedral and elsewhere
very frequently, and made the most punctual payments. Moreover, a
casual remark had informed her that he was on friendly terms with Mr.
Martin Warricombe, whom her son knew as a gentleman of distinction. He
often sat up very late at night, but, doubtless, that was the practice
of Londoners. No lodger could have given less trouble, or have
acknowledged with more courtesy all that was done for his convenience.

No one ever called upon Mr. Peak, but he was often from home for many
hours together, probably on visits to great people in city or country.
It seemed rather strange, however, that the postman so seldom brought
anything for him. Though he had now been more than two months in the
house, he had received only three letters, and those at long intervals.

Noticeable was the improvement in his health since his arrival here.
The pallor of his cheeks was giving place to a wholesome tinge; his eye
was brighter; he showed more disposition to converse, and was readier
with pleasant smiles. Mrs. Roots even heard him singing in his
bedroom--though, oddly enough, it was a secular song on Sunday morning.
The weekly bills for food, which at first had been very modest, grew
richer in items. Godwin had, in fact, never felt so well. He extended
his walks in every direction, sometimes rambling up the valley to
sleepy little towns where he could rest in the parlours of old inns,
sometimes striking across country to this or that point of the
sea-coast, or making his way to the nearer summits of Dartmoor, noble
in their wintry desolation. He marked with delight every promise of
returning spring. When he could only grant himself a walk of an hour or
two in the sunny afternoon, there was many a deep lane within easy
reach, where the gorse gleamed in masses of gold, and the little
oak-trees in the hedges were ruddy with last year's clinging leafage,
and catkins hung from the hazels, and the fresh green of sprouting ivy
crept over bank and wall. Had he now been in London, the morning would
have awakened him to the glow of sunrise, he felt the sweet air
breathing health into fog and slush and misery. As it was, when he
looked out upon his frame and vigour into his mind. There were moments
when he could all but say of himself that he was at peace with the
world.

As on a morning towards the end of March, when a wind from the Atlantic
swept spaces of brightest blue amid the speeding clouds, and sang
joyously as it rushed over hill and dale. It was the very day for an
upland walk, for a putting forth of one's strength in conflict with
boisterous gusts and sudden showers, that give a taste of earth's
nourishment. But Godwin had something else in view. After breakfast, he
sat down to finish a piece of work which had occupied him for two or
three days, a translation from a German periodical. His mind wrought
easily, and he often hummed an air as his pen moved over the paper.
When the task was completed, he rolled his papers and the pamphlet
together, put them into the pocket of his overcoat, and presently went
forth.

Twenty minutes' walk brought him to the Warricombes' house. It was his
second call within the present week, but such assiduity had not
hitherto been his wont. Though already summoned twice or thrice by
express invitation, he was sparing of voluntary visits. Having asked
for Mr. Warricombe, he was forthwith conducted to the study. In the
welcome which greeted his appearance, he could detect no suspicion of
simulated warmth, though his ear had unsurpassable discrimination.

'Have you looked through it?' Martin exclaimed, as he saw the foreign
periodical in his visitor's hand.

'I have written a rough translation'----

'Oh, how could you think of taking such trouble! These things are sent
to me by the dozen--I might say, by the cartload. My curiosity would
have been amply satisfied if you had just told me the drift of the
thing.'

'It seemed to me,' said Peak, modestly, 'that the paper was worth a
little careful thought. I read it rapidly at first, but found myself
drawn to it again. It states the point of view of the average
scientific mind with such remarkable clearness, that I wished to think
it over, and the best way was to do so pen in hand.'

'Well, if you really did it on your own account'----

Mr. Warricombe took the offered sheets and glanced at the first of them.

'My only purpose,' said Godwin 'in calling again so soon was to leave
this with you.'

He made as though he would take his departure.

'You want to get home again? Wait at least till this shower is over. I
enjoy that pelting of spring rain against the window. In a minute or
two we shall have the laurels flashing in the sunshine, as if they were
hung with diamonds.'

They stood together looking out on to the garden. Presently their talk
returned to the German disquisition, which was directed against the
class of quasi-scientific authors attacked by Peak himself in his
_Critical_ article. In the end Godwin sat down and began to read the
translation he had made, Mr. Warricombe listening with a thoughtful
smile. From time to time the reader paused and offered a comment,
endeavouring to show that the arguments were merely plausible; his air
was that of placid security, and he seemed to enjoy the irony which
often fell from his lips. Martin frequently scrutinised him, and always
with a look of interest which betokened grave reflection.

'Here,' said Godwin at one point, 'he has a note citing a passage from
Reusch's book on _The Bible and Nature_. If I am not mistaken, he
misrepresents his author, though perhaps not intentionally.'

'You know the book?'

'I have studied it carefully, but I don't possess it. I thought I
remembered this particular passage very well.'

'Is it a work of authority?'

'Yes; it is very important. Unfortunately, it hasn't yet been
translated. Rather bulky, but I shouldn't mind doing it myself if I
were sure of finding a publisher.'

'_The Bible and Nature_,' said Martin, musingly. 'What is his scheme?
How does he go to work?'

Godwin gave a brief but lucid description of the book, and Mr
Warricombe listened gravely. When there had been silence for some
moments, the latter spoke in a tone he had never yet used when
conversing with Peak. He allowed himself, for the first time, to betray
a troubled doubt on the subject under discussion.

'So he makes a stand at Darwinism as it affects man?'

Peak had yet no means of knowing at what point Martin himself 'made a
stand'. Modes of reconcilement between scientific discovery and
religious tradition are so very numerous, and the geologist was only
now beginning to touch upon these topics with his young acquaintance.
That his mind was not perfectly at ease amid the conflicts of the day,
Godwin soon perceived, and by this time he had clear assurance that
Martin would willingly thrash out the whole debate with anyone who
seemed capable of supporting orthodox tenets by reasoning not
unacceptable to a man of broad views. The negativist of course assumed
from the first that Martin, however respectable his knowledge, was far
from possessing the scientific mind, and each conversation had supplied
him with proofs of this defect; it was not at all in the modern spirit
that the man of threescore years pursued his geological and kindred
researches, but with the calm curiosity of a liberal intellect which
has somehow taken this direction instead of devoting itself to literary
study. At bottom, Godwin had no little sympathy with Mr. Warricombe; he
too, in spite of his militant instincts, dwelt by preference amid
purely human interests. He grasped with firm intelligence the modes of
thought which distinguish scientific men, but his nature did not prompt
him to a consistent application of them. Personal liking enabled him to
subdue the impulses of disrespect which, under other circumstances,
would have made it difficult for him to act with perfection his present
part. None the less, his task was one of infinite delicacy. Martin
Warricombe was not the man to unbosom himself on trivial instigation.
It must be a powerful influence which would persuade him to reveal
whatever self-questionings lay beneath his genial good breeding and
long-established acquiescence in a practical philosophy. Godwin guarded
himself against his eager emotions; one false note, one syllable of
indiscretion, and his aims might be hopelessly defeated.

'Yes,' was his reply to the hesitating question. 'He argues strenuously
against the descent of man. If I understand him, he regards the
concession of this point as impossible.'

Martin was deep in thought. He held a paper-knife bent upon his knee,
and his smooth, delicate features wore an unquiet smile.

'Do you know Hebrew, Mr. Peak?'

The question came unexpectedly, and Godwin could not help a momentary
confusion, but he covered it with the tone of self-reproach.

'I am ashamed to say that I am only now taking it up seriously.'

'I don't think you need be ashamed,' said Martin, good-naturedly. 'Even
a mind as active as yours must postpone some studies. Reusch, I
suppose, is sound on that head?'

The inquiry struck Godwin as significant. So Mr. Warricombe attached
importance to the verbal interpretation of the Old Testament.

'Distinctly an authority,' he replied. 'He devotes whole chapters to a
minute examination of the text.'

'If you had more leisure,' Martin began, deliberately, when he had
again reflected, 'I should be disposed to urge you to undertake that
translation.'

Peak appeared to meditate.

'Has the book been used by English writers?' the other inquired.

'A good deal.--It was published in the sixties, but I read it in a new
edition dated a few years ago. Reusch has kept pace with the men of
science. It would be very interesting to compare the first form of the
book with the latest.'

'It would, very.'

Raising his head from the contemplative posture, Godwin exclaimed, with
a laugh of zeal:

'I think I must find time to translate him. At all events, I might
address a proposal to some likely publisher. Yet I don't know how I
should assure him of my competency.'

'Probably a specimen would be the surest testimony.'

'Yes. I might do a few chapters.'

Mr. Warricombe's lapse into silence and brevities intimated to Godwin
that it was time to take leave. He always quitted this room with
reluctance. Its air of luxurious culture affected his senses
deliciously, and he hoped that he might some day be permitted to linger
among the cabinets and the library shelves. There were so many books he
would have liked to take down, some with titles familiar to him, others
which kindled his curiosity when he chanced to observe them. The
library abounded in such works as only a wealthy man can purchase, and
Godwin, who had examined some of them at the British Museum, was filled
with the humaner kind of envy on seeing them in Mr. Warricombe's
possession. Those publications of the Palaeontological Society, one
volume of which (a part of Davidson's superb work on the _Brachiopoda_)
even now lay open within sight--his hand trembled with a desire to
touch them! And those maps of the Geological Surveys, British and
foreign, how he would have enjoyed a day's poring over them!

He rose, but Martin seemed in no haste to bring the conversation to an
end.

'Have you read M'Naughten's much-discussed book?'

'Yes.'

'Did you see the savage attack in _The Critical_ not long ago?'

Godwin smiled, and made quiet answer:

'I should think it was the last word of scientific bitterness and
intolerance.'

'Scientific?' repeated Martin, doubtfully. 'I don't think the writer
was a man of science. I saw it somewhere attributed to Huxley, but that
was preposterous. To begin with, Huxley would have signed his name;
and, again, his English is better. The article seemed to me to be
stamped with literary rancour; it was written by some man who envies
M'Naughten's success.'

Peak kept silence. Martin's censure of the anonymous author's style
stung him to the quick, and he had much ado to command his countenance.

'Still,' pursued the other, 'I felt that much of his satire was only
too well pointed. M'Naughten is suggestive; but one comes across books
of the same purpose which can have no result but to injure their cause
with all thinking people.'

'I have seen many such,' remarked Godwin.

Mr. Warricombe stepped to a bookcase and took down a small volume.

'I wonder whether you know this book of Ampare's, _La Grace, Rome, et
Dante_? Delightful for odd moments!--There came into my mind a passage
here at the beginning, apropos of what we were saying: "_Il faut
souvent un vrai courage pour persister dans une opinion juste en depit
de ses defenseurs_."--Isn't that capital?'

Peak received it with genuine appreciation; for once he was able to
laugh unfeignedly. The aphorism had so many applications from his own
point of view.

'Excellent!--I don't remember to have seen the book.'

'Take it, if you care to.'

This offer seemed a distinct advance in Mr. Warricombe's friendliness.
Godwin felt a thrill of encouragement.

'Then you will let me keep this translation for a day or two?' Martin
added, indicating the sheets of manuscript. 'I am greatly obliged to
you for enabling me to read the thing.'

They shook hands. Godwin had entertained a slight hope that he might be
asked to stay to luncheon; but it could not be much past twelve
o'clock, and on the whole there was every reason for feeling satisfied
with the results of his visit. Before long he would probably receive
another invitation to dine. So with light step he went out into the
hall, where Martin again shook hands with him.

The sky had darkened over, and a shrilling of the wind sounded through
the garden foliage--fir, and cypress, and laurel. Just as Godwin
reached the gate, he was met by Miss Warricombe and Fanny, who were
returning from a walk. They wore the costume appropriate to March
weather in the country, close-fitting, defiant of gusts; and their
cheeks glowed with health. As he exchanged greetings with them, Peak
received a new impression of the sisters. He admired the physical
vigour which enabled them to take delight in such a day as this, when
girls of poorer blood and ignoble nurture would shrink from the sky's
showery tumult, and protect their surface elegance by the fireside.
Impossible for Sidwell and Fanny to be anything but graceful, for at
all times they were perfectly unaffected.

'There'll be another storm in a minute,' said the younger of them,
looking with interest to the quarter whence the wind came. 'How
suddenly they burst! What a rush! And then in five minutes the sky is
clear again.'

Her eyes shone as she turned laughingly to Peak.

'You're not afraid of getting wet? Hadn't you better come under cover?'

'Here it is!' exclaimed Sidwell, with quieter enjoyment. 'Take shelter
for a minute or two, Mr. Peak.'

They led the way to the portico, where Godwin stood with them and
watched the squall. A moment's downpour of furious rain was followed by
heavy hailstones, which drove horizontally before the shrieking wind.
The prospect had wrapped itself in grey gloom. At a hundred yards'
distance, scarcely an object could be distinguished; the storm-cloud
swooped so low that its skirts touched the branches of tall elms, a
streaming, rushing raggedness.

'Don't you enjoy that?' Fanny asked of Godwin.

'Indeed I do.'

'You should be on Dartmoor in such weather,' said Sidwell. 'Father and
I were once caught in storms far worse than this--far better, I ought
to say, for I never knew anything so terrifically grand.'

Already it was over. The gusts diminished in frequency and force, the
hail ceased, the core of blackness was passing over to the eastern sky.
Fanny ran out into the garden, and pointed upward.

'Look where the sunlight is coming!'

An uncloaked patch of heaven shone with colour like that of the girl's
eyes--faint, limpid blue. Reminding himself that to tarry longer in
this company would be imprudent, Godwin bade the sisters good-morning.
The frank heartiness with which Fanny pressed his hand sent him on his
way exultant. Not too strong a word; for, independently of his wider
ambitions, he was moved and gratified by the thought that kindly
feeling towards him had sprung up in such a heart as this. Nor did
conscience so much as whisper a reproach. With unreflecting
ingenuousness he tasted the joy as if it were his right. Thus long he
had waited, through years of hungry manhood, for the look, the tone,
which were in harmony with his native sensibilities. Fanny Warricombe
was but an undeveloped girl, yet he valued her friendship above the
passionate attachment of any woman bred on a lower social plane. Had it
been possible, he would have kissed her fingers with purest reverence.

When out of sight of the house, he paused to regard the sky again. Its
noontide splendour was dazzling; masses of rosy cloud sailed swiftly
from horizon to horizon, the azure deepening about them. Yet before
long the west would again send forth its turbulent spirits, and so the
girls might perhaps be led to think of him.

By night the weather grew more tranquil. There was a full moon, and its
radiance illumined the ever-changing face of heaven with rare grandeur.
Godwin could not shut himself up over his books; he wandered far away
into the country, and let his thoughts have freedom.

He was learning to review with calmness the course by which he had
reached his now steadfast resolve. A revulsion such as he had
experienced after his first day of simulated orthodoxy, half a year
ago, could not be of lasting effect, for it was opposed to the whole
tenor of his mature thought. It spoilt his holiday, but had no chance
of persisting after his return to the atmosphere of Rotherhithe. That
he should have been capable of such emotion was, he said to himself, in
the just order of things; callousness in the first stages of an
undertaking which demanded gross hypocrisy would signify an ignoble
nature--a nature, indeed, which could never have been submitted to
trial of so strange a kind. But he had overcome himself; that phase of
difficulty was outlived, and henceforth he saw only the material
obstacles to be defied by his vindicated will.

What he proposed to himself was a life of deliberate baseness. Godwin
Peak never tried to play the sophist with this fact. But he succeeded
in justifying himself by a consideration of the circumstances which had
compelled him to a vile expedient. Had his project involved conscious
wrong to other persons, he would scarcely even have speculated on its
possibilities. He was convinced that no mortal could suffer harm, even
if he accomplished the uttermost of his desires. Whom was he in danger
of wronging? The conventional moralist would cry: Everyone with whom he
came in slightest contact! But a mind such as Peak's has very little to
do with conventional morality. Injury to himself he foresaw and
accepted; he could never be the man nature designed in him; and he must
frequently submit to a self-contempt which would be very hard to bear.
Those whom he consistently deceived, how would they suffer? Martin
Warricombe to begin with. Martin was a man who had lived his life, and
whose chief care would now be to keep his mind at rest in the faiths
which had served him from youth onwards. In that very purpose, Godwin
believed he could assist him. To see a young man, of strong and trained
intellect, championing the old beliefs, must doubtless be a source of
reassurance to one in Martin's position. Reassurance derived from a
lie?--And what matter, if the outcome were genuine, if it lasted until
the man himself was no more? Did not every form of content result from
illusion? What was truth without the mind of the believer?

Society, then--at all events that part of it likely to be affected by
his activity? Suppose him an ordained priest, performing all the
functions implied in that office. Why, to think only of examples
recognised by the public at large, how would he differ for the worse
from this, that, and the other clergyman who taught Christianity, all
but with blunt avowal, as a scheme of human ethics? No wolf in sheep's
clothing he! He plotted against no man's pocket, no woman's honour; he
had no sinister design of sapping the faith of congregations--a scheme,
by-the-bye, which fanatic liberators might undertake with vast
self-approval. If by a word he could have banished religious dogma from
the minds of the multitude, he would not have cared to utter it.
Wherein lay, indeed, a scruple to be surmounted. The Christian priest
must be a man of humble temper; he must be willing, even eager, to sit
down among the poor in spirit as well as in estate, and impart to them
his unworldly solaces. Yes, but it had always been recognised that some
men who could do the Church good service were personally unfitted for
those meek ministrations. His place was in the hierarchy of intellect;
if he were to be active at all, it must be with the brain. In his
conversation with Buckland Warricombe, last October, he had spoken not
altogether insincerely. Let him once be a member of the Church
militant, and his heart would go with many a stroke against that
democratic movement which desired, among other things, the Church's
abolition. He had power of utterance. Roused to combat by the
proletarian challenge, he could make his voice ring in the ears of men,
even though he used a symbolism which he would not by choice have
adopted.

For it was natural that he should anticipate distinction. Whatever his
lot in life, he would not be able to rest among an inglorious
brotherhood. If he allied himself with the Church, the Church must
assign him leadership, whether titular or not was of small moment. In
days to come, let people, if they would, debate his history, canvass
his convictions. His scornful pride invited any degree of publicity,
when once his position was secure.

But in the meantime he was leaving aside the most powerful of all his
motives, and one which demanded closest scrutiny. Not ambition, in any
ordinary sense; not desire of material luxury; no incentive recognised
by unprincipled schemers first suggested his dishonour. This edifice of
subtle untruth had for its foundation a mere ideal of sexual love. For
the winning of some chosen woman, men have wrought vehemently, have
ruined themselves and others, have achieved triumphs noble or
degrading. But Godwin Peak had for years contemplated the possibility
of baseness at the impulse of a craving for love capable only of a
social (one might say, of a political) definition. The woman throned in
his imagination was no individual, but the type of an order. So
strangely had circumstances moulded him, that he could not brood on a
desire of spiritual affinities, could not, as is natural to most
cultivated men, inflame himself with the ardour of soul reaching to
soul; he was pre-occupied with the contemplation of qualities which
characterise a class. The sense of social distinctions was so burnt
into him, that he could not be affected by any pictured charm of mind
or person in a woman who had not the stamp of gentle birth and
breeding. If once he were admitted to the intimacy of such women, then,
indeed, the canons of selection would have weight with him; no man more
capable of disinterested choice. Till then, the ideal which possessed
him was merely such an assemblage of qualities as would excite the
democrat to disdain or fury.

In Sidwell Warricombe this ideal found an embodiment; but Godwin did
not thereupon come to the conclusion that Sidwell was the wife he
desired. Her influence had the effect of deciding his career, but he
neither imagined himself in love with her, nor tried to believe that he
might win her love if he set himself to the endeavour. For the first
time he was admitted to familiar intercourse with a woman whom he
_could_ make the object of his worship. He thought much of her; day and
night her figure stood before him; and this had continued now for half
a year. Still he neither was, nor dreamt himself, in love with her.
Before long his acquaintance would include many of her like, and at any
moment Sidwell might pale in the splendour of another's loveliness.

But what reasoning could defend the winning of a wife by false
pretences? This, his final aim, could hardly be achieved without grave
wrong to the person whose welfare must in the nature of things be a
prime motive with him. The deception he had practised must sooner or
later be discovered; lifelong hypocrisy was incompatible with perfect
marriage; some day he must either involve his wife in a system of
dishonour, or with her consent relinquish the false career, and find
his happiness in the obscurity to which he would then be relegated.
Admit the wrong. Grant that some woman whom he loved supremely must, on
his account, pass through a harsh trial--would it not be in his power
to compensate her amply? The wife whom he imagined (his idealism in
this matter was of a crudity which made the strangest contrast with his
habits of thought on every other subject) would be ruled by her
emotions, and that part of her nature would be wholly under his
governance. Religious fanaticism could not exist in her, for in that
case she would never have attracted him. Little by little she would
learn to think as he did, and her devotedness must lead her to pardon
his deliberate insincerities. Godwin had absolute faith in his power of
dominating the woman whom he should inspire with tenderness. This was a
feature of his egoism, the explanation of those manifold
inconsistencies inseparable from his tortuous design. He regarded his
love as something so rare, so vehement, so exalting, that its bestowal
must seem an abundant recompense for any pain of which he was the cause.

Thus, with perfect sincerity of argument, did Godwin Peak face the
undertaking to which he was committed. Incidents might perturb him, but
his position was no longer a cause of uneasiness--save, indeed, at
those moments when he feared lest any of his old acquaintances might
hear of him before time was ripe. This was a source of anxiety, but
inevitable; one of the risks he dared.

Had it seemed possible, he would have kept even from his mother the
secret of his residence at Exeter; but this would have necessitated the
establishment of some indirect means of communication with her, a
troublesome and uncertain expedient. He shrank from leaving her in
ignorance of his whereabouts, and from passing a year or two without
knowledge of her condition. And, on the whole, there could not be much
danger in this correspondence. The Moxeys, who alone of his friends had
ever been connected with Twybridge, were now absolutely without
interests in that quarter. From them he had stolen away, only
acquainting Christian at the last moment, in a short letter, with his
departure from London. 'It will be a long time before we again see each
other--at least, I think so. Don't trouble your head about me. I can't
promise to write, and shall be sorry not to hear how things go with
you; but may all happen as you wish!' In the same way he had dealt with
Earwaker, except that his letter to Staple Inn was much longer, and
contained hints which the philosophic journalist might perchance truly
interpret. '"He either fears his fate too much"--you know the old song.
I have set out on my life's adventure. I have gone to seek that without
which life is no longer worth having. Forgive my shabby treatment of
you, old friend. You cannot help me, and your displeasure would be a
hindrance in my path. A last piece of counsel: throw overboard the
weekly rag, and write for people capable of understanding you.'
Earwaker was not at all likely to institute a search; he would accept
the situation, and wait with quiet curiosity for its upshot. No doubt
he and Moxey would discuss the affair together, and any desire
Christian might have to hunt for his vanished comrade would yield
before the journalist's surmises. No one else had any serious reason
for making inquiries. Probably he might dwell in Devonshire, as long as
he chose, without fear of encountering anyone from his old world.

Occasionally--as to-night, under the full moon--he was able to cast off
every form of trouble, and rejoice in his seeming liberty. Though every
step in the life before him was an uncertainty, an appeal to fortune,
his faith in himself grasped strongly at assurance of success. Once
more he felt himself a young man, with unwearied energies; he had
shaken off the burden of those ten frustrate years, and kept only their
harvest of experience. Old in one sense, in another youthful, he had
vast advantages over such men as would henceforth be his
competitors--the complex brain, the fiery heart, passion to desire, and
skill in attempting. If with such endowment he could not win the prize
which most men claim as a mere matter of course, a wife of social
instincts correspondent with his own, he must indeed be luckless. But
he was not doomed to defeat! Foretaste of triumph urged the current of
his blood and inflamed him with exquisite ardour. He sang aloud in the
still lanes the hymns of youth and of love; and, when weariness brought
him back to his lonely dwelling, he laid his head on the pillow, and
slept in dreamless calm.

As for the details of his advance towards the clerical state, he had
decided to resume his career at the point where it was interrupted by
Andrew Peak. Twice had his education received a check from hostile
circumstances: when domestic poverty compelled him to leave school for
Mr. Moxey's service, and when shame drove him from Whitelaw College. In
reflecting upon his own character and his lot he gave much weight to
these irregularities, no doubt with justice. In both cases he was
turned aside from the way of natural development and opportunity. He
would now complete his academic course by taking the London degree at
which he had long ago aimed; the preliminary examination might without
difficulty be passed this summer, and next year he might write himself
Bachelor of Arts. A return to the studies of boyhood probably accounted
in some measure for the frequent gaiety which he attributed to
improving health and revived hopes. Everything he undertook was easy to
him, and by a pleasant self-deception he made the passing of a school
task his augury of success in greater things.

During the spring he was indebted to the Warricombes' friendship for
several new acquaintances. A clergyman named Lilywhite, often at the
Warricombes' house, made friendly overtures to him; the connection
might be a useful one, and Godwin made the most of it. Mr. Lilywhite
was a man of forty well--read, of scientific tastes, an active
pedestrian. Peak had no difficulty in associating with him on amicable
terms. With Mrs. Lilywhite, the mother of six children and possessed of
many virtues, he presently became a favourite,--she saw in him 'a great
deal of quiet moral force'. One or two families of good standing made
him welcome at their houses; society is very kind to those who seek its
benefits with recognised credentials. The more he saw of these wealthy
and tranquil middle-class people, the more fervently did he admire the
gracefulness of their existence. He had not set before himself an
imaginary ideal; the girls and women were sweet, gentle, perfect in
manner, and, within limits, of bright intelligence. He was conscious of
benefiting greatly, and not alone in things extrinsic, by the
atmosphere of such homes.

Nature's progress towards summer kept him in a mood of healthful
enjoyment. From the window of his sitting-room he looked over the
opposite houses to Northernhay, the hill where once stood Rougemont
Castle, its wooded declivities now fashioned into a public garden. He
watched the rooks at their building in the great elms, and was
gladdened when the naked branches began to deck themselves, day by day
the fresh verdure swelling into soft, graceful outline. In his walks he
pried eagerly for the first violet, welcomed the earliest blackthorn
blossom; every common flower of field and hedgerow gave him a new, keen
pleasure. As was to be expected he found the same impulses strong in
Sidwell Warricombe and her sister. Sidwell could tell him of secret
spots where the wood-sorrel made haste to flower, or where the white
violet breathed its fragrance in security from common pilferers. Here
was the safest and pleasantest matter for conversation. He knew that on
such topics he could talk agreeably enough, revealing without stress or
importunity his tastes, his powers, his attainments. And it seemed to
him that Sidwell listened with growing interest. Most certainly her
father encouraged his visits to the house, and Mrs. Warricombe behaved
to him with increase of suavity.

In the meantime he had purchased a copy of Reusch's _Bibel und Natur_,
and had made a translation of some fifty pages. This experiment he
submitted to a London publishing house, with proposals for the
completion of the work; without much delay there came a civil letter of
excuse, and with it the sample returned. Another attempt again met with
rejection. This failure did not trouble him. What he really desired was
to read through his version of Reusch with Martin Warricombe, and
before long he had brought it to pass that Martin requested a perusal
of the manuscript as it advanced, which it did but slowly. Godwin durst
not endanger his success in the examination by encroaching upon hours
of necessary study; his leisure was largely sacrificed to _Bibel und
Natur_, and many an evening of calm golden loveliness, when he longed
to be amid the fields, passed in vexatious imprisonment. The name of
Reusch grew odious to him, and he revenged himself for the hypocrisy of
other hours by fierce scorn, cast audibly at this laborious exegetist.