CHAPTER IV


This summer Peak became a semi-graduate of London University. To avoid
the risk of a casual meeting with acquaintances, he did not go to
London, but sat for his examination at the nearest provincial centre.
The revival of boyish tremors at the successive stages of this business
was anything but agreeable; it reminded him, with humiliating force,
how far he had strayed from the path indicated to his self-respecting
manhood. Defeat would have strengthened in overwhelming revolt all the
impulses which from time to time urged him to abandon his servile
course. But there was no chance of his failing to satisfy the
examiners. With 'Honours' he had now nothing to do; enough for his
purpose that in another year's time he would write himself Bachelor of
Arts, and thus simplify the clerical preliminaries. In what quarter he
was to look for a curacy remained uncertain. Meanwhile his enterprise
seemed to prosper, and success emboldened his hopes.

Hopes which were no longer vague, but had defined themselves in a way
which circumstances made inevitable. Though he had consistently guarded
himself against the obvious suggestions arising out of his intercourse
with the Warricombe family, though he still emphasised every
discouraging fact, and strove to regard it as axiomatic that nothing
could be more perilous to his future than a hint of presumption or
self-interest in word or deed beneath that friendly roof, it was coming
to pass that he thought of Sidwell not only as the type of woman
pursued by his imagination, but as herself the object of his converging
desires. Comparison of her with others had no result but the deepening
of that impression she had at first made upon him. Sidwell exhibited
all the qualities which most appealed to him in her class; in addition,
she had the charms of a personality which he could not think of common
occurrence. He was yet far from understanding her; she exercised his
powers of observation, analysis, conjecture, as no other person had
ever done; each time he saw her (were it but for a moment) he came away
with some new perception of her excellence, some hitherto unmarked
grace of person or mind whereon to meditate. He had never approached a
woman who possessed this power at once of fascinating his senses and
controlling his intellect to a glad reverence. Whether in her presence
or musing upon her in solitude, he found that the unsparing naturalism
of his scrutiny was powerless to degrade that sweet, pure being.

Rare, under any circumstances, is the passionate love which controls
every motive of heart and mind; rarer still that form of it which, with
no assurance of reciprocation, devotes exclusive ardour to an object
only approachable through declared obstacles. Godwin Peak was not
framed for romantic languishment. In general, the more complex a man's
mechanism, and the more pronounced his habit of introspection, the less
capable is he of loving with vehemence and constancy. Heroes of passion
are for the most part primitive natures, nobly tempered; in our time
they tend to extinction. Growing vulgarism on the one hand, and on the
other a development of the psychological conscience, are unfavourable
to any relation between the sexes, save those which originate in pure
animalism, or in reasoning less or more generous. Never having
experienced any feeling which he could dignify with the name of love,
Godwin had no criterion in himself whereby to test the emotions now
besetting him. In a man of his age this was an unusual state of things,
for when the ardour which will bear analysis has at length declared
itself, it is wont to be moderated by the regretful memory of that
fugacious essence which gave to the first frenzy of youth its
irrecoverable delight. He could not say in reply to his impulses: If
that was love which overmastered me, this must be something either more
or less exalted. What he _did_ say was something of this kind: If
desire and tenderness, if frequency of dreaming rapture, if the calmest
approval of the mind and the heart's most exquisite, most painful
throbbing, constitute love,--then assuredly I love Sidwell. But if to
love is to be possessed with madness, to lose all taste of life when
hope refuses itself, to meditate frantic follies, to deem it
inconceivable that this woman should ever lose her dominion over me, or
another reign in her stead,--then my passion falls short of the true
testrum, and I am only dallying with fancies which might spring up as
often as I encountered a charming girl.

All things considered, to encourage this amorous preoccupation was
probably the height of unwisdom. The lover is ready at deluding
himself, but Peak never lost sight of the extreme unlikelihood that he
should ever become Martin Warricombe's son-in-law, of the thousand
respects which forbade his hoping that Sidwell would ever lay her hand
in his. That deep-rooted sense of class which had so much influence on
his speculative and practical life asserted itself, with rigid
consistency, even against his own aspirations; he attributed to the
Warricombes more prejudice on this subject than really existed in them.
He, it was true, belonged to no class whatever, acknowledged no
subordination save that of the hierarchy of intelligence; but this
could not obscure the fact that his brother sold seeds across a
counter, that his sister had married a haberdasher, that his uncle
(notoriously) was somewhere or other supplying the public with cheap
repasts. Girls of Sidwell's delicacy do not misally themselves, for
they take into account the fact that such misalliance is fraught with
elements of unhappiness, affecting husband as much as wife. No need to
dwell upon the scruples suggested by his moral attitude; he would never
be called upon to combat them with reference to Sidwell's future.

What, then, was he about? For what advantage was he playing the
hypocrite? Would he, after all, be satisfied with some such wife as the
average curate may hope to marry?

A hundred times he reviewed the broad question, by the light of his six
months' experience. Was Sidwell Warricombe his ideal woman, absolutely
speaking? Why, no; not with all his glow of feeling could he persuade
himself to declare her that. Satisfied up to a certain point, admitted
to the sphere of wealthy refinement, he now had leisure to think of yet
higher grades, of the women who are not only exquisite creatures by
social comparison but rank by divine right among the foremost of their
race. Sidwell was far from intolerant, and held her faiths in a
sincerely ethical spirit. She judged nobly, she often saw with clear
vision. But must not something of kindly condescension always blend
with his admiring devotedness? Were it but possible to win the love of
a woman who looked forth with eyes thoroughly purged from all mist of
tradition and conventionalism, who was at home among arts and sciences,
who, like himself, acknowledged no class and bowed to no authority but
that of the supreme human mind!

Such women are to be found in every age, but how many of them shine
with the distinctive ray of womanhood? These are so rare that they have
a place in the pages of history. The truly emancipated woman--it was
Godwin's conviction--is almost always asexual; to him, therefore,
utterly repugnant. If, then, he were not content to waste his life in a
vain search for the priceless jewel, which is won and worn only by
fortune's supreme favourites, he must acquiesce in the imperfect
marriage commonly the lot of men whose intellect allows them but little
companionship even among their own sex: for that matter, the lot of
most men, and necessarily so until the new efforts in female education
shall have overcome the vice of wedlock as hitherto sanctioned. Nature
provides the hallucination which flings a lover at his mistress's feet.
For the chill which follows upon attainment she cares nothing--let
society and individuals make their account with that as best they may.
Even with a wife such as Sidwell the process of disillusion would
doubtless have to be faced, however liberal one's allowances in the
forecast.

Reflections of this colour were useful; they helped to keep within
limits the growth of agitating desire. But there were seasons when
Godwin surrendered himself to luxurious reverie, hours of summer
twilight which forbade analysis and listened only to the harmonies of
passion. Then was Sidwell's image glorified, and all the delights
promised by such love as hers fired his imagination to intolerable
ecstasy. O heaven! to see the smile softened by rosy warmth which would
confess that she had given her heart--to feel her supple fingers
intertwined with his that clasped them--to hear the words in which a
mind so admirable, instincts so delicate, would make expression of
their tenderness! To live with Sidwell--to breathe the fragrance of
that flower of womanhood in wedded intimacy--to prove the devotion of a
nature so profoundly chaste! The visionary transport was too poignant;
in the end it drove him to a fierce outbreak of despairing wrath. How
could he dream that such bliss would be the reward of despicable
artifice, of calculated dishonour? Born a rebel, how could his be the
fate of those happy men who are at one with the order of things? The
prophecy of a heart wrung with anguish foretold too surely that for him
was no rapturous love, no joy of noble wedlock. Solitude, now and for
ever, or perchance some base alliance of the flesh, which would involve
his later days in sordid misery.

In moods of discouragement he thought with envy of his old self, his
life in London lodgings, his freedom in obscurity. It belongs to the
pathos of human nature that only in looking back can one appreciate the
true value of those long tracts of monotonous ease which, when we are
living through them, seem of no account save in relation to past or
future; only at a distance do we perceive that the exemption from
painful shock was in itself a happiness, to be rated highly in
comparison with most of those disturbances known as moments of joy. A
wise man would have entertained no wish but that he might grow old in
that same succession of days and weeks and years. Without anxiety
concerning his material needs (certainly the most substantial of
earthly blessings), his leisure not inadequate to the gratification of
a moderate studiousness, with friends who offered him an ever-ready
welcome,--was it not much? If he were condemned to bachelorhood, his
philosophy was surely capable of teaching him that the sorrows and
anxieties he thus escaped made more than an offset against the
satisfactions he must forego. Reason had no part in the fantastic
change to which his life had submitted, nor was he ever supported by a
hope which would bear his cooler investigation.

And yet hope had her periods of control, for there are times when the
mind wearies of rationality, and, as it were in self-defense, in
obedience to the instinct of progressive life, craves a specious
comfort. It seemed undeniable that Mr. Warricombe regarded him with
growth of interest, invited his conversation more unreservedly. He
began to understand Martin's position with regard to religion and
science, and thus could utter himself more securely. At length he
ventured to discourse with some amplitude on his own convictions--the
views, that is to say, which he thought fit to adopt in his character
of a liberal Christian. It was on an afternoon of early August that
this opportunity presented itself. They sat together in the study, and
Martin was in a graver mood than usual, not much disposed to talk, but
a willing listener. There had been mention of a sermon at the
Cathedral, in which the preacher declared his faith that the maturity
of science would dispel all antagonisms between it and revelation.

'The difficulties of the unbeliever,' said Peak, endeavouring to avoid
a sermonising formality, though with indifferent success, 'are, of
course, of two kinds; there's the theory of evolution, and there's
modern biblical criticism. The more I study these objections, the less
able I am to see how they come in conflict with belief in Christianity
as a revealed religion.'

'Yet you probably had your time of doubt?' remarked the other, touching
for the first time on this personal matter.

'Oh, yes; that was inevitable. It only means that one's development is
imperfect. Most men who confirm themselves in agnosticism are kept at
that point by arrested moral activity. They give up the intellectual
question as wearisome, and accept the point of view which flatters
their prejudices: thereupon follows a blunting of the sensibilities on
the religious side.'

'There are men constitutionally unfitted for the reception of spiritual
truth,' said Martin, in a troubled tone. He was playing with a piece of
string, and did not raise his eyes.

'I quite believe that. There's our difficulty when we come to
evidences. The evidences of science are wholly different in _kind_ from
those of religion. Faith cannot spring from any observation of
phenomena, or scrutiny of authorities, but from the declaration made to
us by the spiritual faculty. The man of science can only become a
Christian by the way of humility--and that a kind of humility he finds
it difficult even to conceive. One wishes to impress upon him the
harmony of this faith with the spiritual voice that is in every man. He
replies: I know nothing of that spiritual voice. And if that be true,
one can't help him by argument.'

Peak had constructed for himself, out of his reading, a plausible
system which on demand he could set forth with fluency. The tone of
current apologetics taught him that, by men even of cultivated
intellect, such a position as he was now sketching was deemed tenable;
yet to himself it sounded so futile, so nugatory, that he had to harden
his forehead as he spoke. Trial more severe to his conscience lay in
the perceptible solicitude with which Mr Warricombe weighed these
disingenuous arguments. It was a hateful thing to practise such
deception on one who probably yearned for spiritual support. But he had
committed himself to this course, and must brave it out.

'Christianity,' he was saying presently--appropriating a passage of
which he had once made careful note--'is an organism of such vital
energy that it perforce assimilates whatever is good and true in the
culture of each successive age. To understand this is to learn that we
must depend rather on _constructive_, than on _defensive_, apology.
That is to say, we must draw evidence of our faith from its latent
capacities, its unsuspected affinities, its previsions, its
adaptability, comprehensiveness, sympathy, adequacy to human needs.'

'That puts very well what I have always felt,' replied Mr Warricombe.
'Yet there will remain the objection that such a faith may be of purely
human origin. If evolution and biblical criticism seem to overthrow all
the historic evidences of Christianity, how convince the objectors that
the faith itself was divinely given?'

'But I cannot hold for a moment,' exclaimed Peak, in the words which he
knew his interlocutor desired to hear, 'that all the historic evidences
have been destroyed. That indeed would shake our position.'

He enlarged on the point, with display of learning, yet studiously
avoiding the tone of pedantry.

'Evolution,' he remarked, when the dialogue had again extended its
scope, 'does not touch the evidence of design in the universe; at most
it can correct our imperfect views (handed down from an age which had
no scientific teaching because it was not ripe for it) of the mode in
which that design was executed, or rather is still being executed.
Evolutionists have not succeeded in explaining life; they have merely
discovered a new law relating to life. If we must have an explanation,
there is nothing for it but to accept the notion of a Deity. Indeed,
how can there be religion without a divine author? Religion is based on
the idea of a divine mind which reveals itself to us for moral ends.
The Christian revelation, we hold, has been developed gradually, much
of it in connection with secondary causes and human events. It has come
down to us in anything but absolute purity--like a stream which has
been made turbid by its earthly channel. The lower serves its purpose
as a stage to the higher, then it falls away, the higher surviving.
Hitherto, the final outcome of evolution is the soul in a bodily
tenement. May it not be that the perfected soul alone survives in the
last step of the struggle for existence?'

Peak had been talking for more than a quarter of an hour. Under stress
of shame and intellectual self-criticism (for he could not help
confuting every position as he stated it) his mind often wandered. When
he ceased speaking there came upon him an uncomfortable dreaminess
which he had already once or twice experienced when in colloquy with
Mr. Warricombe; a tormenting metaphysical doubt of his own identity
strangely beset him. With involuntary attempt to recover the familiar
self he grasped his own wrist, and then, before he was aware, a laugh
escaped him, an all but mocking laugh, unsuitable enough to the spirit
of the moment. Mr Warricombe was startled, but looked up with a
friendly smile.

'You fear,' he said, 'that this last speculation may seem rather
fanciful to me?'

Godwin was biting his lip fiercely, and could not command himself to
utterance of a word.

'By no means, I assure you,' added the other. 'It appeals to me very
strongly.'

Peak rose from his chair.

'It struck me,' he said, 'that I had been preaching a sermon rather
than taking part in a conversation. I'm afraid it is the habit of men
who live a good deal alone to indulge in monologues.'

On his return home, the sight of _Bibel und Natur_ and his sheets of
laborious manuscript filled him with disgust. It was two or three days
before he could again apply himself to the translation. Yet this
expedient had undoubtedly been of great service to him in the matter of
his relations with Mr. Warricombe. Without the aid of Reusch he would
have found it difficult to speak naturally on the theme which drew
Martin into confidences and established an intimacy between them.

Already they had discussed in detail the first half of the book. How a
man of Mr. Warricombe's intelligence could take grave interest in an
arid exegesis of the first chapter of Genesis, Godwin strove in vain to
comprehend. Often enough the debates were perilously suggestive of
burlesque, and, when alone, he relieved himself of the laughter he had
scarce restrained. For instance, there was that terrible _thohu wabohu_
of the second verse, a phrase preserved from the original, and tossed
into all the corners of controversy. Was _thohu wabohu_ the first
condition of the earth, or was it merely a period of division between a
previous state of things and creation as established by the Hexaemeron?
Did light exist or not, previous to the _thohu wabohu_? Then, again,
what kind of 'days' were the three which passed before the birth of the
sun? Special interest, of course, attached to the successive theories
of theology on the origin of geologic strata. First came the 'theory of
restitution', which explained unbiblical antiquity by declaring that
the strata belonged to a world before the Hexaimeron, a world which had
been destroyed, and succeeded by the new creation. Less objectionable
was the 'concordistic theory', which interprets the 'six days' as so
many vast periods of creative activity. But Reusch himself gave
preference to the 'ideal theory', the supporters whereof (diligently
adapting themselves to the progress of science) hold that the six days
are not to be understood as consecutive periods at all, but merely as
six phases of the Creator's work.

By the exercise of watchfulness and dexterity, Peak managed for the
most part to avoid expression of definite opinions. His attitude was
that of a reverent (not yet reverend) student. Mr. Warricombe was less
guarded, and sometimes allowed himself to profess that he saw nothing
but vain ingenuity in Reusch's argument: as, for example, where the
theologian, convinced that the patriarchs did really live to an
abnormal age, suggests that man's life was subsequently shortened in
order that 'sin might not flourish with such exuberance'. This passage
caused Martin to smile.

'It won't do, it won't do,' he said, quietly. 'Far better apply his
rationalism here as elsewhere. These are wonderful old stories, not to
be understood literally. Nothing depends upon them nothing essential.'

Thereupon Peak mused anxiously. Not for the first time there occurred
to him a thought which suited only too well with his ironic habits of
mind. What if this hypocritic comedy were altogether superfluous? What
if Mr. Warricombe would have received him no less cordially had he
avowed his sincere position, and contented himself with guarding
against offensiveness? Buckland, it was true, had suffered in his
father's esteem on account of his unorthodoxy, but that young man had
been too aggressive, too scornful. With prudence, would it not have
been possible to win Martin's regard by fortifying the scientific
rather than the dogmatic side of his intellect? If so, what a hopeless
error had he committed!--But Sidwell? Was _she_ liberal enough to take
a personal interest in one who had renounced faith in revelation? He
could not decide this question, for of Sidwell he knew much less than
of her father. And it was idle to torment himself with such debate of
the irreversible.

And, indeed, there seemed much reason for believing that Martin,
whatever the extent of his secret doubts, was by temperament armed
against agnosticism. Distinctly it comforted him to hear the
unbelievers assailed--the friends of whom he spoke most heartily were
all on the orthodox side; if ever a hint of gentle malice occurred in
his conversation, it was when he spoke of a fallacy, a precipitate
conclusion, detected in works of science. Probably he was too old to
overcome this bias.

His view of the Bible appeared to harmonise with that which Peak put
forth in one of their dialogues. 'The Scriptures were meant to be
literally understood in primitive ages, and spiritually when the growth
of science made it possible. _Genesis_ was never intended to teach the
facts of natural history; it takes phenomena as they appear to
uninstructed people, and uses them only for the inculcation of moral
lessons; it presents to the childhood of the world a few great
elementary truths. And the way in which phenomena are spoken of in the
Old Testament is never really incompatible with the facts as we know
them nowadays. Take the miracle of the sun standing still, which is
supposed to be a safe subject of ridicule. Why, it merely means that
light was miraculously prolonged; the words used are those which common
people would at all times understand.'

(Was it necessary to have admitted the miracle? Godwin asked himself.
At all events Mr. Warricombe nodded approvingly.)

'Then the narrative of the creation of man; that's not at all
incompatible with his slow development through ages. To teach the
scientific fact--if we yet really know it--would have been worse than
useless. The story is meant to express that spirit, and not matter, is
the source of all existence. Indeed, our knowledge of the true meaning
of the Bible has increased with the growth of science, and naturally
that must have been intended from the first. Things which do not
concern man's relation to the spiritual have no place in this book;
they are not within its province. Such things were discoverable by
human reason, and the knowledge which achieves has nothing to do with a
divine revelation.'

To Godwin it was a grinding of the air, but the listener appeared to
think it profitable.

With his clerical friend, Mr. Lilywhite, he rarely touched on matters
of religion. The vicar of St. Ethelreda's was a man well suited to
support the social dignity of his Church. A gentleman before
everything, he seemed incapable of prying into the state of a
parishioner's soul; you saw in him the official representative of a
Divinity characterised by well-bred tolerance. He had written a
pleasant little book on the by-ways of Devon and Cornwall, which
brought about his intimacy with the Warricombe household. Peak liked
him more the better he knew him, and in the course of the summer they
had one or two long walks together, conversing exclusively of the
things of earth. Mr. Lilywhite troubled himself little about evolution;
he spoke of trees and plants, of birds and animals, in a loving spirit,
like the old simple naturalists. Geology did not come within his sphere.

'I'm very sorry,' he said, 'that I could never care much for it. Don't
think I'm afraid of it--not I! I feel the grandeur of its scope, just
as I do in the case of astronomy; but I have never brought myself to
study either science. A narrowness of mind, no doubt. I can't go into
such remote times and regions. I love the sunlight and the green fields
of this little corner of the world--too well, perhaps: yes, perhaps too
well.'

After one of these walks, he remarked to Mrs. Lilywhite:

'It's my impression that Mr. Peak has somehow been misled in his choice
of a vocation. I don't think he'll do as a churchman.'

'Why not, Henry?' asked his wife, with gentle concern, for she still
spoke of Peak's 'quiet moral force'.

'There's something too restless about him. I doubt whether he has
really made up his mind on any subject whatever. Well, it's not easy to
explain what I feel, but I don't think he will take Orders.'

Calling at the vicarage one afternoon in September, Godwin found Mrs
Lilywhite alone. She startled him by saying at once:

'An old acquaintance of yours was with us yesterday, Mr. Peak.'

'Who could that be, I wonder?'

He smiled softly, controlling his impulse to show quite another
expression.

'You remember Mr. Bruno Chilvers?'

'Oh, yes!'

There was a constriction in his throat. Struggling to overcome it, he
added:

'But I should have thought he had no recollection of me.'

'Quite the contrary, I assure you. He is to succeed Mr. Bell of St
Margaret's, at Christmas; he was down here only for a day or two, and
called upon my husband with a message from an old friend of ours. It
appears he used to know the Warricombes, when they lived at Kingsmill,
and he had been to see them before visiting us; it was there your name
was mentioned to him.'

Godwin had seated himself, and leaned forward, his hands grasping the
glove he had drawn off.

'We were contemporaries at Whitelaw College,' he observed.

'So we learnt from him. He spoke of you with the greatest interest; he
was delighted to hear that you contemplated taking Orders. Of course we
knew Mr. Chilvers by reputation, but my husband had no idea that he was
coming to Exeter. What an energetic man he is! In a few hours he seemed
to have met everyone, and to have learnt everything. My husband says he
felt quite rebuked by such a display of vigour!'

Even in his discomposure, graver than any that had affected him since
his talks with Buckland Warricombe, Peak was able to notice that the
Rev. Bruno had not made a wholly favourable impression upon the
Lilywhites. There was an amiable causticity in that mention of his
'display of vigour', such as did not often characterise Mrs Lilywhite's
comments. Finding that the vicar would be away till evening, Godwin
stayed for only a quarter of an hour, and when he had escaped it
irritated and alarmed him to reflect how unusual his behaviour must
have appeared to the good lady.

The blow was aimed at his self-possession from such an unlikely
quarter. In Church papers he had frequently come across Chilvers's
name, and the sight of it caused him a twofold disturbance: it was
hateful to have memories of humiliation revived, and perhaps still more
harassing to be forced upon acknowledgment of the fact that he stood as
an obscure aspirant at the foot of the ladder which his old rival was
triumphantly ascending. Bad enough to be classed in any way with such a
man as Chilvers; but to be regarded as at one with him in religious
faith, to be forbidden the utterance of scorn when Chilvers was
extolled, stung him so keenly that he rushed into any distraction to
elude the thought. When he was suffering shame under the gaze of
Buckland Warricombe he remembered Chilvers, and shrank as before a
merited scoff. But the sensation had not been abiding enough to affect
his conduct. He had said to himself that he should never come in
contact with the fellow, and that, after all, community of religious
profession meant no more, under their respective circumstances, than if
both were following law or physic.

But the unforeseen had happened. In a few months, the Rev. Bruno
Chilvers would be a prominent figure about the streets of Exeter; would
be frequently seen at the Warricombes', at the Lilywhites', at the
houses of their friends. His sermons at St. Margaret's would doubtless
attract, and form a staple topic of conversation. Worse than all, his
expressions of 'interest' and 'delight' made it probable that he would
seek out his College competitor and offer the hand of brotherhood.
These things were not to be avoided--save by abandonment of hopes, save
by retreat, by yielding to a hostile destiny.

That Chilvers might talk here and there of Whitelaw stories was
comparatively unimportant. The Warricombes must already know all that
could be told, and what other people heard did not much matter. It was
the man himself that Peak could not endure. Dissembling had hitherto
been no light task. The burden had more than once pressed so gallingly
that its permanent support seemed impossible; but to stand before Bruno
Chilvers in the attitude of humble emulation, to give respectful ear
whilst the popular cleric advised or encouraged, or bestowed pontifical
praise, was comparable only to a searing of the flesh with red irons.
Even with assured prospect of recompense in the shape of Sidwell
Warricombe's heart and hand, he could hardly submit to such an ordeal.
As it was, reason having so often convinced him that he clung to a
visionary hope, the torture became gratuitous, and its mere suggestion
inspired him with a fierce resentment destructive of all his purposes.

For several days he scarcely left the house. To wrath and dread had
succeeded a wretched torpor, during which his mind kept revolving the
thoughts prompted by his situation, turbidly and to no issue. He tasted
all the bitterness of the solitude to which he had condemned himself;
there was not a living soul with whom he could commune. At moments he
was possessed with the desire of going straightway to London, and
making Earwaker the confidant of all his folly. But that demanded an
exertion of which he was physically incapable. He thought of the old
home at Twybridge, and was tempted also in that direction. His mother
would welcome him with human kindness; beneath her roof he could lie
dormant until fate should again point his course. He even wrote a
letter saying that in all probability he should pay a visit to
Twybridge before long. But the impulse was only of an hour's duration,
for he remembered that to talk with his mother would necessitate all
manner of new falsehoods, a thickening of the atmosphere of lies which
already oppressed him. No; if he quitted Exeter, it must be on a longer
journey. He must resume his purpose of seeking some distant country,
where new conditions of life would allow him to try his fortune at
least as an honest adventurer. In many parts of colonial England his
technical knowledge would have a value, and were there not women to be
won beneath other skies--women perhaps of subtler charm than the old
hidebound civilisation produced? Reminiscences of scenes and figures in
novels he had read nourished the illusion. He pictured some thriving
little town at the ends of the earth, where a young Englishman of good
manners and unusual culture would easily be admitted to the intimacy of
the richest families; he saw the ideal colonist (a man of good birth,
but a sower of wild oats in his youth) with two or three daughters
about him--beautiful girls, wondrously self-instructed--living amid
romantic dreams of the old world, and of the lover who would some day
carry them off (with a substantial share of papa's wealth) to Europe
and the scenes of their imagination.

The mind has marvellous methods of self-defence against creeping
lethargy of despair. At the point to which he had been reduced by
several days of blank despondency, Peak was able to find genuine
encouragement in visions such as this. He indulged his fancy until the
vital force began to stir once more within him, and then, with one
angry sweep, all his theological books and manuscripts were flung out
of sight. Away with this detestable mummery! Now let Bruno Chilvers
pour his eloquence from the pulpit of St. Margaret's, and rear to what
heights he could the edifice of his social glory; men of that stamp
were alone fitted to thrive in England. Was not _he_ almost certainly a
hypocrite, masking his brains (for brains he had) under a show of
broadest Anglicanism? But his career was throughout consistent. He trod
in the footsteps of his father, and with inherited aptitude moulded
antique traditions into harmony with the taste of the times. Compared
with such a man, Peak felt himself a bungler. The wonder was that his
clumsy lying had escaped detection.

Another day, and he had done nothing whatever, but was still buoyed up
by the reaction of visionary hope. His need now was of communicating
his change of purpose to some friendly hearer. A week had passed since
he had exchanged a word with anyone but Mrs. Roots, and converse he
must. Why not with Mr. Warricombe? That was plainly the next step: to
see Martin and make known to him that after all he could not become a
clergyman. No need of hinting a conscientious reason. At all events,
nothing more definite than a sense of personal unfitness, a growing
perception of difficulties inherent in his character. It would be very
interesting to hear Mr. Warricombe's replies.

A few minutes after this decision was taken, he set off towards the Old
Tiverton Road, walking at great speed, flourishing his stick--symptoms
of the nervous cramp (so to speak) which he was dispelling. He reached
the house, and his hand was on the bell, when an unexpected opening of
the door presented Louis Warricombe just coming forth for a walk. They
exchanged amiabilities, and Louis made known that his father and mother
were away on a visit to friends in Cornwall.

'But pray come in,' he added, offering to re-enter.

Peak excused himself, for it was evident that Louis made a sacrifice to
courtesy. But at that moment there approached from the garden Fanny
Warricombe and her friend Bertha Lilywhite, eldest daughter of the
genial vicar; they shook hands with Godwin, Fanny exclaiming:

'Don't go away, Mr. Peak. Have a cup of tea with us--Sidwell is at
home. I want to show you a strange sort of spleenwort that I gathered
this morning.'

'In that case,' said her brother, smiling, 'I may confess that I have
an appointment. Pray forgive me for hurrying off, Mr. Peak.'

Godwin was embarrassed, but the sprightly girl repeated her summons,
and he followed into the house.