CHAPTER III


'_Pereunt et imputantur_.'

Godwin Peak read the motto beneath the clock in Exeter Cathedral, and
believed it of Christian origin. Had he known that the words were found
in Martial, his rebellious spirit would have enjoyed the consecration
of a phrase from such an unlikely author. Even as he must have laughed
had he stood in the Vatican before the figures of those two Greek
dramatists who, for ages, were revered as Christian saints.

His ignorance preserved him from a clash of sentiments. This afternoon
he was not disposed to cynicism; rather he welcomed the softening
influence of this noble interior, and let the golden sunlight form what
shapes it would--heavenly beam, mystic aureole--before his mind's eye.
Architecture had no special interest for him, and the history of church
or faith could seldom touch his emotions; but the glorious handiwork of
men long dead, the solemn stillness of an ancient sanctuary, made that
appeal to him which is independent of names.

'_Pereunt et imputantur_.'

He sat down where the soft, slow ticking of the clock could guide his
thoughts. This morning he had left London by the earliest train, and
after a night in Exeter would travel westward by leisurely stages,
seeing as much as possible of the coast and of that inland scenery
which had geological significance. His costume declared him bent on
holiday, but, at the same time, distinguished him with delicate
emphasis from the tourist of the season. Trustworthy sartorial skill
had done its best for his person. Sitting thus, he had the air of a
gentleman who enjoys no unwonted ease. He could forget himself in
reverie, and be unaware of soft footfalls that drew near along the
aisle.

But the sound of a young voice, subdued yet very clear, made claim upon
his attention.

'Sidwell!--Sidwell!'

She who spoke was behind him; on looking up, he saw that a lady just in
front had stopped and turned to the summons; smiling, she retraced her
steps. He moved, so as to look discreetly in the backward direction,
and observed a group of four persons, who were occupied with a tablet
on the wall: a young man (not long out of boyhood), a girl who might be
a year or two younger, and two ladies, of whom it could only be said
that they were mature in the beauty of youth, probably of
maidenhood--one of them, she who had been called back by the name of
'Sidwell'.

Surely an uncommon name. From a guide-book, with which he had amused
himself in the train, he knew that one of the churches of Exeter was
dedicated to St. Sidwell, but only now did his recollection apprise him
of a long past acquaintance with the name of the saint. Had not
Buckland Warricombe a sister called Sidwell? And--did he only surmise a
connection between the Warricombes and Devon? No, no; on that remote
day, when he went out with Buckland to the house near Kingsmill, Mr.
Warricombe spoke to him of Exeter,--mentioning that the town of his
birth was Axminster, where William Buckland, the geologist, also was
born; whence the name of his eldest son. How suddenly it all came back!

He rose and moved apart to a spot whence he might quietly observe the
strangers. 'Sidwell', once remarked, could not be confused with the
companion of her own age; she was slimmer, shorter (if but slightly),
more sedate in movement, and perhaps better dressed--though both were
admirable in that respect. Ladies, beyond a doubt. And the young man--

At this distance it was easy to deceive oneself, but did not that face
bring something back? Now, as he smiled, it seemed to recall Buckland
Warricombe--with a difference. This might well be a younger brother;
there used to be one or two.

They were familiar with the Cathedral, and at present appeared to take
exclusive interest in certain mural monuments. For perhaps ten minutes
they lingered about the aisle, then, after a glance at the west window,
went forth. With quick step, Godwin pursued them; he issued in time to
see them entering an open carriage, which presently drove away towards
High Street.

For half an hour he walked the Cathedral Close. Not long ago, on first
coming into that quiet space, with its old houses, its smooth lawns,
its majestic trees, he had felt the charm peculiar to such scenes--the
natural delight in a form of beauty especially English. Now, the
impression was irrecoverable; he could see nothing but those four
persons, and their luxurious carriage, and the two beautiful horses
which had borne them--whither? As likely as not the identity he had
supposed for them was quite imaginary; yet it would be easy to
ascertain whether a Warricombe family dwelt at Exeter. The forename of
Buckland's father--? He never had known it. Still, it was worth while
consulting a directory.

He walked to his hotel.

Yes, the name Warricombe stood there, but it occurred more than once.
He sought counsel of the landlord. Which of these Warricombes was a
gentleman of position, with grown-up sons and daughters? To such a
description answered Martin Warricombe, Esquire, well known in the
city. His house was in the Old Tiverton Road, out beyond St Sidwell's,
two miles away; anyone in that district would serve as guide to it.

With purpose indefinite, Godwin set forth in the direction suggested.
At little more than a saunter, he passed out of High Street into its
continuation, where he soon descried the Church of St. Sidwell, and
thence, having made inquiry, walked towards the Old Tiverton Road. He
was now quite beyond the town limits, and few pedestrians came in
sight; if he really wished to find the abode of Martin Warricombe, he
must stop the first questionable person. But to what end this inquiry?
He could not even be certain that Martin was the man he had in mind,
and even were he right in all his conjectures, what had he to do with
the Warricombes?

Ten years ago the family had received him courteously as Buckland's
fellow-student; he had spent an hour or two at their house, and
subsequently a few words had passed when they saw him on prize-day at
Whitelaw. To Buckland he had never written; he had never since heard of
him; that name was involved in the miserable whirl of circumstances
which brought his College life to a close, and it was always his hope
that Buckland thought no more of him. Even had there been no
disagreeable memories, it was surely impossible to renew after this
interval so very slight an acquaintance. How could they receive him,
save with civilly mild astonishment?

An errand-boy came along, whistling townwards, a big basket over his
head. No harm in asking where Mr. Warricombe lived. The reply was
prompt: second house on the right hand, rather a large one, not a
quarter of a mile onward.

Here, then. The site was a good one. From this part of the climbing
road one looked over the lower valley of the Exe, saw the whole
estuary, and beyond that a horizon of blue sea. Fair, rich land, warm
under the westering sun. The house itself seemed to be old, but after
all was not very large; it stood amid laurels, and in the garden behind
rose a great yew-tree. No person was visible; but for the wave-like
murmur of neighbouring pines, scarce a sound would have disturbed the
air.

Godwin walked past, and found that the road descended into a deep
hollow, whence between high banks, covered with gorse and bracken and
many a summer flower, it led again up a hill thick planted with firs;
at the lowest point was a bridge over a streamlet, offering on either
hand a view of soft green meadows. A spot of exquisite retirement:
happy who lived here in security from the struggle of life!

It was folly to spoil his enjoyment of country such as this by dreaming
impossible opportunities. The Warricombes could be nothing to him; to
meet with Buckland would only revive the shame long ago outlived. After
resting for a few minutes he turned back, passed the silent house
again, delighted himself with the wide view, and so into the city once
more, where he began to seek the remnants of its old walls.

The next morning was Sunday, and he had planned to go by the Plymouth
train to a station whence he could reach Start Point; but his mood was
become so unsettled that ten o'clock, when already he should have been
on his journey, found him straying about the Cathedral Close. A mere
half-purpose, a vague wavering intention, which might at any moment be
scattered by common sense, drew his steps to the door of the Cathedral,
where people were entering for morning service; he moved idly within
sight of the carriages which drew up. Several had discharged their
freightage of tailoring and millinery, when two vehicles, which seemed
companions, stopped at the edge of the pavement, and from the second
alighted the young ladies whom Godwin had yesterday observed; their
male companion, however, was different. The carriage in advance also
contained four persons: a gentleman of sixty, his wife, a young girl,
and the youth of yesterday. It needed but a glance to inform Godwin
that the oldest of the party was Mr. Warricombe, Buckland's father; ten
years had made no change in his aspect. Mrs. Warricombe was not less
recognisable. They passed at once into the edifice, and he had scarcely
time to bestow a keen look upon Sidwell.

That was a beautiful girl; he stood musing upon the picture registered
by his brain. But why not follow, and from a neighbouring seat survey
her and the others at his leisure? Pooh! But the impulse constrained
him. After all, he could not get a place that allowed him to see
Sidwell. Her companion, however, the one who seemed to be of much the
same age, was well in view. Sisters they could not be; nothing of the
Warricombe countenance revealed itself in those handsome but
strongly-marked features. A beautiful girl, she also, yet of a type
that made slight appeal to him. Sidwell was all he could imagine of
sweet and dignified; more modest in bearing, more gracile, more--

Monday at noon, and he still walked the streets of Exeter. Early this
morning he had been out to the Old Tiverton Road, and there, on the
lawn amid the laurels, had caught brief glimpse of two female figures,
in one of which he merely divined Sidwell. Why he tarried thus he did
not pretend to explain to himself. Rain had just come on, and the
lowering sky made him low-spirited; he mooned about the street under
his umbrella.

And at this rate, might vapour away his holiday. Exeter was tedious,
but he could not make up his mind to set forth for the sea-shore, where
only his own thoughts awaited him. Packed away in his wallet lay
geological hammer, azimuth compass, clinometer, miniature
microscope,--why should he drag all that lumber about with him? What to
him were the bygone millions of ages, the hoary records of unimaginable
time? One touch of a girl's hand, one syllable of musical speech,--was
it not that whereof his life had truly need?

As remote from him, however, as the age of the pterodactyl. How often
was it necessary to repeat this? On a long voyage, such as he had all
but resolved to take, one might perchance form acquaintances. He had
heard of such things; not impossibly, a social circle might open to him
at Buenos Ayres. But here in England his poor origin, his lack of means
would for ever bar him from the intimacy of people like the Warricombes.

He loitered towards the South-Western station, dimly conscious of a
purpose to look for trains. Instead of seeking the time-tables he stood
before the bookstall and ran his eye along the titles of new novels; he
had half a mind to buy one of Hardy's and read himself into the temper
which suited summer rambles. But just as his hand was stretched forth,
a full voice, speaking beside him, made demand for a London weekly
paper. Instantly he turned. The tones had carried him back to Whitelaw;
the face disturbed that illusion, but substituted a reality which threw
him into tremor.

His involuntary gaze was met with one of equal intensity. A man of his
own years, but in splendid health and with bright eyes that looked
enjoyment of life, suddenly addressed him.

'Godwin Peak--surely--?'

'Buckland Warricombe, no less surely.'

They shook hands with vigour, laughing in each other's faces; then,
after a moment's pause, Warricombe drew aside from the bookstall, for
sake of privacy.

'Why did we lose sight of each other?' he asked, flashing a glance at
Godwin's costume. 'Why didn't you write to me at Cambridge? What have
you been doing this half-century?'

'I have been in London all the time.'

'I am there most of the year. Well, I rejoice to have met you. On a
holiday?'

'Loitering towards Cornwall.'

'In that case, you can come and have lunch with me at my father's
house. It's only a mile or two off. I was going to walk, but we'll
drive, if you like.'

There was no refusing, and no possibility of reflection. Buckland's
hearty manner made the invitation in itself a thoroughly pleasant one,
and before Peak could sufficiently command his thoughts to picture the
scene towards which he was going they were walking side by side through
the town. In appearance, Warricombe showed nothing of the revolutionary
which, in old days, he aimed at making himself, and his speech had a
suavity which no doubt resulted from much intercourse with the polished
world; Godwin was filled with envious admiration of his perfect
physique, and the mettle which kept it in such excellent vigour. Even
for a sturdy walker, it was no common task to keep pace with Buckland's
strides; Peak soon found himself conversing rather too breathlessly for
comfort.

'What is your latest record for the mile?' he inquired.

Warricombe, understanding at once the reference to his old athletic
pastime and its present application, laughed merrily, and checked his
progress.

'A bad habit of mine; it gets me into trouble with everyone.
By-the-bye, haven't you become a stronger man than used to seem likely?
I'm quite glad to see how well you look.'

The sincerity of these expressions, often repeated, put Godwin far more
at his ease than the first moment's sensation had promised. He too
began to feel a genuine pleasure in the meeting, and soon bade defiance
to all misgivings. Delicacy perhaps withheld Warricombe from further
mention of Whitelaw, but on the other hand it was not impossible that
he knew nothing of the circumstances which tormented Godwin's memory.
On leaving the College perchance he had lost all connection with those
common friends who might have informed him of subsequent jokes and
rumours. Unlikely, to be sure; for doubtless some of his Whitelaw
contemporaries encountered him at Cambridge; and again, was it not
probable that the younger Warricombe had become a Whitelaw student?
Then Professor Gale--no matter! The Warricombes of course knew all
about Andrew Peak and his dining-rooms, but they were liberal-minded,
and could forgive a boy's weakness, as well as overlook an
acquaintance's obscure origin. In the joy of finding himself
exuberantly welcomed by a man of Buckland's world he overcame his
ignoble self-consciousness.

'Did you know that we were in this part of the country?' Warricombe
asked, once more speeding ahead.

'I always thought of you in connection with Kingsmill.'

'We gave up Thornhaw seven years ago. My father was never quite
comfortable out of Devonshire. The house I am taking you to has been in
our family for three generations. I have often tried to be proud of the
fact, but, as you would guess, that kind of thing doesn't come very
natural to me.'

In the effort to repudiate such sentiment, Buckland distinctly betrayed
its hold upon him. He imagined he was meeting Godwin on equal ground,
but the sensibility of the proletarian could not thus be deceived.
There was a brief silence, during which each looked away from the other.

'Still keep up your geology?' was Warricombe's next question.

'I can just say that I haven't forgotten it all.'

'I'm afraid that's more than I can. During my Cambridge time it caused
disagreeable debates with my father. You remember that his science is
of the old school. I wouldn't say a word to disparage him. I believe
the extent of his knowledge is magnificent; but he can't get rid of
that old man of the sea, the Book of Genesis. A few years ago I wasn't
too considerate in argument, and I talked as I oughtn't to have done,
called names, and so on. The end of it was, I dropped science
altogether, having got as much out of it as I needed. The good old
pater has quite forgiven my rudeness. At present we agree to differ,
and get on capitally. I'm sure he'll be delighted to see you. There are
some visitors with us; a Miss Moorhouse and her brother. I think you'll
like them. Couldn't you stay overnight?'

Godwin was unable to reply on the instant, and his companion proceeded
with the same heartiness.

'Just as you like, you know. But do stay if you can. On Wednesday
morning I must go back to town. I act as secretary to Godolphin, the
member for Slacksea.'

Peak's acquaintance with current politics was slight, but Mr. Ellis
Godolphin, the aristocratic Radical, necessarily stood before his
imagination with some clearness of outline. So this was how life had
dealt with Buckland. The announcement was made with a certain
satisfaction, as if it implied more than the hearer would readily
appreciate. Again there was a slight shrinking on Godwin's part; it
would be natural for him to avow his own position, and so leave no room
for misunderstandings, but before he could shape a phrase Buckland was
again questioning.

'Do you ever see any of the old fellows?'

'I have met one or two of them, by chance.'

As if his tact informed him that this inquiry had been a mistake,
Warricombe resumed the subject of his family.

'My brother Louis is at home--of course you can't remember him; he was
a youngster when you were at Thornhaw. The younger boy died some years
ago, a pony accident; cut up my father dreadfully. Then there's my
sister Sidwell, and my sister Fanny--that's all of us. I can't quite
answer for Louis, but the rest are of the old school. Liberal enough,
don't be afraid. But--well, the old school.'

As Godwin kept silence, the speaker shot a glance at him, keenly
scrutinising. Their eyes did not meet; Peak kept his on the ground.

'Care much about politics nowadays?'

'Not very much.'

'Can't say that I do myself,' pursued Buckland. 'I rather drifted into
it. Godolphin, I daresay, has as little humbug about him as most
parliamentarians; we stick to the practical fairly well. I shall never
go into the House on my own account. But there's a sort of pleasure in
being in the thick of public movements. I'm not cut out for debate;
should lose my temper, and tell disagreeable truths--which wouldn't do,
you know. But behind the scenes--it isn't bad, in a way.'

A longer pause obliged Godwin to speak of himself.

'My life is less exciting. For years I have worked in a manufacturing
laboratory at Rotherhithe.'

'So science has carried the day with you, after all. It used to be very
doubtful.'

This was a kind and pleasant way of interpreting necessity. Godwin felt
grateful, and added with a smile:

'I don't think I shall stick to it much longer. For one thing, I am
sick of town. Perhaps I shall travel for a year or two; perhaps--I'm in
a state of transition, to tell the truth.'

Buckland revolved this information; his face told that he found it
slightly puzzling.

'You once had thoughts of literature.'

'Long given up.'

'Leisure would perhaps revive them?'

'Possibly; but I think not.'

They were now quitting the town, and Peak, unwilling to appear before
strangers in a state of profuse perspiration, again moderated his
friend's speed. They began to talk about the surrounding country, a
theme which occupied them until the house was reached. With
quick-beating heart, Godwin found himself at the gate by which he had
already twice passed. Secure in the decency of his apparel, and no
longer oppressed by bashfulness, he would have gone joyously forward
but for the dread of a possible ridiculous association which his name
might revive in the thoughts of Mr. and Mrs. Warricombe. Yet
Buckland--who had no lack of kindly feeling--would hardly have brought
him here had the reception which awaited him been at all dubious.

'If we don't come across anyone,' said Warricombe, 'we'll go straight
up to my room.'

But the way was not clear. Within the beautiful old porch sat Sidwell
Warricombe and her friend of the striking countenance, whom Godwin now
knew as Miss Moorhouse. Buckland addressed his sister in a tone of
lively pleasure.

'Whom do you think I have met and brought home with me? Here is my old
friend, Godwin Peak.'

Under the two pairs of female eyes, Godwin kept a calm, if rather
stern, face.

'I should have had no difficulty in recognising Mr. Peak,' said
Sidwell, holding out her hand. 'But was the meeting quite by chance?'

To Godwin himself the question was of course directed, with a look of
smiling interest--such welcome as could not have been improved upon;
she listened to his reply, then presented him to Miss Moorhouse. A
slight languor in her movements and her voice, together with the
beautiful coldness of her complexion, made it probable that she did not
share the exuberant health manifest in her two brothers. She conversed
with mature self-possession, yet showed a slight tendency to
abstractedness. On being addressed, she regarded the speaker steadily
for an instant before shaping her answer, which always, however
trifling the subject, seemed carefully worded. In these few moments of
dialogue, Godwin reached the conclusion that Sidwell had not much sense
of humour, but that the delicacy of her mind was unsurpassable.

In Miss Moorhouse there was no defect of refinement, but her
conversation struck a note of sprightliness at once more energetic and
more subtle than is often found in English girls. Thus, though at times
she looked so young that it might be doubted whether she had long been
out of her teens, at others one suspected her older than Sidwell. The
friends happened to be as nearly as possible of an age, which was
verging to twenty-six.

When he spoke to Miss Moorhouse, Buckland's frank tone subdued itself.
He watched her face with reverent attention, smiled when she smiled,
and joined in her laughter with less than his usual volume of sound. In
acuteness he was obviously inferior to her, and there were moments when
he betrayed some nervousness under her rejoinders. All this was matter
of observation for Peak, who had learnt to exercise his discernment
even whilst attending to the proprieties.

The sounding of the first luncheon-bell left the young men free to go
upstairs. When at length they presented themselves in the drawing-room,
Mrs. Warricombe and her younger daughter sat there alone. The greeting
of his hostess did not quite satisfy Godwin, though it was sufficiently
courteous; he remembered that ten years ago Mrs. Warricombe had
appeared to receive him with some restraint, and his sensation in
renewing her acquaintance was one of dislike. But in a moment the
master of the house joined them, and no visitor could have had a more
kindly welcome than that he offered to his son's friend. With genial
tact, Mr. Warricombe ignored the interval since his last conversation
with Godwin, and spoke as if this visit were the most natural thing in
the world.

'Do you already know the country about Exeter?'

'I have seen very little of it yet.'

'Oh, then, we must show you our points of view. Our own garden offers a
glimpse of the river-mouth and a good prospect of Haldon--the ridge
beyond the Exe; but there are many much better points within easy
reach. You are in no hurry, I hope?'

Louis Warricombe and Miss Moorhouse's brother were away on a long walk;
they did not return for lunch. Godwin was glad of this, for time had
wrought the change in him that he felt more at ease in female society
than under the eyes of young men whose social position inclined them to
criticism. The meal proved as delightful as luncheon is wont to be in a
luxurious country-house, when brilliant sunshine gleams on the foliage
visible from windows, and the warmth of the season sanctions clear
colours in costume. The talk was wholly of country pleasures. It
afforded the visitor no little satisfaction to be able to make known
his acquaintance with parts of England to which the Warricombes had not
penetrated. Godwin learnt that the family were insular in their tastes;
a mention by Miss Moorhouse of continental scenes led the host to avow
a strong preference for his own country, under whatever aspect, and
Sidwell murmured her sympathy.

No less introspective than in the old days, though he could better
command his muscles, Peak, after each of his short remarks, made
comparison of his tone and phraseology with those of the other
speakers. Had he still any marks of the ignoble world from which he
sprang? Any defect of pronunciation, any native awkwardness of
utterance? Impossible to judge himself infallibly, but he was conscious
of no vulgar mannerism. Though it was so long since he left Whitelaw,
the accent of certain of the Professors still remained with him as an
example: when endeavouring to be graceful, he was wont to hear the
voice of Dr Nares, or of Professor Barber who lectured on English
Literature. More recently he had been observant of Christian Moxey's
speech, which had a languid elegance worth imitating in certain
particulars. Buckland Warricombe was rather a careless talker, but it
was the carelessness of a man who had never needed to reflect on such a
matter, the refinement of whose enunciation was assured to him from the
nursery. That now was a thing to be aimed at. Preciseness must be
avoided, for in a young man it seemed to argue conscious effort: a
loose sentence now and then, a colloquialism substituted for the more
grammatical phrase.

Heaven be thanked that he was unconcerned on the point of garb!
Inferiority in that respect would have been fatal to his ease. His
clothes were not too new, and in quality were such as he had the habit
of wearing. The Warricombes must have immediately detected any
pretentiousness, were it but in a necktie; that would impress them more
unfavourably than signs of poverty. But he defied inspection. Not
Sidwell herself, doubtless sensitive in the highest degree, could
conceive a prejudice against him on this account.

His misgivings were overcome. If these people were acquainted with the
'dining-rooms' joke, it certainly did not affect their behaviour to
him, and he could hope, by the force of his personality, to obliterate
from their minds such disagreeable thoughts as they might secretly
entertain. Surely he could make good his claim to be deemed a
gentleman. To Buckland he had declared his position, and no shame
attached to it. A man of scientific tastes, like Mr. Warricombe, must
consider it respectable enough. Grant him a little time, and why should
he not become a recognised friend of this family?

If he were but resident in Exeter.

For the first time, he lost himself in abstraction, and only an inquiry
from Sidwell recalled him.

'You have seen the Cathedral, Mr. Peak?'

'Oh yes! I attended service there yesterday morning.'

Had he reflected, perhaps he would not have added this circumstance;
even in speaking he suffered a confused doubtfulness. But as soon as
the words were uttered, he felt strangely glad. Sidwell bestowed upon
him an unmistakable look of approval; her mother gazed with colder
interest; Mr. Warricombe regarded him, and mused; Buckland, a smile of
peculiar meaning on his close lips, glanced from him to Miss Moorhouse.

'Ah, then, you heard Canon Grayling,' remarked the father of the
family, with something in his tone which answered to Sidwell's facial
expression. 'How did you like his sermon?'

Godwin was trifling with a pair of nut-crackers, but the nervousness
evident in his fingers did not prevent him from replying with a natural
air of deliberation.

'I was especially struck with the passage about the barren fig-tree.'

The words might have expressed a truth, but in that case a tone of
sarcasm must have winged them. As it was, they involved either
hypocrisy or ungenerous irony at the expense of his questioner.
Buckland could not but understand them in the latter sense; his face
darkened. At that moment, Peak met his eye, and encountered its steady
searching gaze with a perfectly calm smile. Half-a-dozen pulsings of
his heart--violent, painful, and the fatal hour of his life had struck.

'What had he to say about it?' Buckland asked, carelessly.

Peak's reply was one of those remarkable efforts of mind--one might
say, of character--which are sometimes called forth, without
premeditation, almost without consciousness, by a profound moral
crisis. A minute or two ago he would have believed it impossible to
recall and state in lucid terms the arguments to which, as he sat in
the Cathedral, he had barely given ear; he remembered vaguely that the
preacher (whose name he knew not till now) had dwelt for a few moments
on the topic indicated, but at the time he was indisposed to listen
seriously, and what chance was there that the chain of thought had
fixed itself in his memory? Now, under the marvelling regard of his
conscious self, he poured forth an admirable rendering of the Canon's
views, fuller than the original--more eloquent, more subtle. For five
minutes he held his hearers in absorbed attention, even Buckland
bending forward with an air of genuine interest; and when he stopped,
rather suddenly, there followed a silence.

'Mr. Peak,' said the host, after a cough of apology, 'you have made
that clearer to me than it was yesterday. I must thank you.'

Godwin felt that a slight bow of acknowledgment was perhaps called for,
but not a muscle would obey his will. He was enervated; perspiration
stood on his forehead. The most severe physical effort could not have
reduced him to a feebler state.

Sidwell was speaking:

'Mr. Peak has developed what Canon Grayling only suggested.'

'A brilliant effort of exegesis,' exclaimed Buckland, with a
good-natured laugh.

Again the young men exchanged looks. Godwin smiled as one might under a
sentence of death. As for the other, his suspicion had vanished, and he
now gave way to frank amusement. Luncheon was over, and by a general
movement all went forth on to the lawn in front of the house. Mr.
Warricombe, even more cordial than hitherto, named to Godwin the
features of the extensive landscape.

'But you see that the view is in a measure spoilt by the growth of the
city. A few years ago, none of those ugly little houses stood in the
mid-distance. A few years hence, I fear, there will be much more to
complain of. I daresay you know all about the ship-canal: the story of
the countess, and so forth?'

Buckland presently suggested that the afternoon might be used for a
drive.

'I was about to propose it,' said his father. 'You might start by the
Stoke Canon Road, so as to let Mr. Peak have the famous view from the
gate; then go on towards Silverton, for the sake of the reversed
prospect from the Exe. Who shall be of the party?'

It was decided that four only should occupy the vehicle, Miss Moorhouse
and Fanny Warricombe to be the two ladies. Godwin regretted Sidwell's
omission, but the friendly informality of the arrangement delighted
him. When the carriage rolled softly from the gravelled drive, Buckland
holding the reins, he felt an animation such as no event had ever
produced in him. No longer did he calculate phrases. A spontaneous
aptness marked his dialogue with Miss Moorhouse, and the laughing words
he now and then addressed to Fanny. For a short time Buckland was
laconic, but at length he entered into the joyous tone of the occasion.
Earwaker would have stood in amazement, could he have seen and heard
the saturnine denizen of Peckham Rye.

The weather was superb. A sea-breeze mitigated the warmth of the
cloudless sun, and where a dark pine-tree rose against the sky it gave
the azure depths a magnificence unfamiliar to northern eyes.

'On such a day as this,' remarked Miss Moorhouse, dividing her look
between Buckland and his friend, 'one feels that there's a good deal to
be said for England.'

'But for the vile weather,' was Warricombe's reply, 'you wouldn't know
such enjoyment.'

'Oh, I can't agree with that for a moment! My capacity for enjoyment is
unlimited. That philosophy is unworthy of you; it belongs to a paltry
scheme called "making the best of things".'

'In which you excel, Miss Moorhouse.'

'That she does!' agreed Fanny--a laughing, rosy-cheeked maiden.

'I deny it! No one is more copious in railing against circumstances.'

'But you turn them all to a joke,' Fanny objected.

'That's my profound pessimism. I am misunderstood. No one expects irony
from a woman.'

Peak found it difficult not to gaze too persistently at the subtle
countenance. He was impelled to examine it by a consciousness that he
himself received a large share of Miss Moorhouse's attention, and a
doubt as to the estimation in which she held him. Canon Grayling's
sermon and Godwin's comment had elicited no remark from her. Did she
belong to the ranks of emancipated women? With his experience of
Marcella Moxey, he welcomed the possibility of this variation of the
type, but at the same time, in obedience to a new spirit that had
strange possession of him, recognised that such phenomena no longer
aroused his personal interest. By the oddest of intellectual processes
he had placed himself altogether outside the sphere of unorthodox
spirits. Concerning Miss Moorhouse he cared only for the report she
might make of him to the Warricombes.

Before long, the carriage was stopped that he might enjoy one of the
pleasantest views in the neighbourhood of the city. A gate,
interrupting a high bank with which the road was bordered, gave
admission to the head of a great cultivated slope, which fell to the
river Exe; hence was suddenly revealed a wide panorama. Three
well-marked valleys--those of the Creedy, the Exe, and the Culm--spread
their rural loveliness to remote points of the horizon; gentle
undulations, with pasture and woodland, with long winding roads, and
many a farm that gleamed white amid its orchard leafage, led the gaze
into regions of evanescent hue and outline. Westward, a bolder swell
pointed to the skirts of Dartmoor. No inappropriate detail disturbed
the impression. Exeter was wholly hidden behind the hill on which the
observers stood, and the line of railway leading thither could only be
descried by special search. A foaming weir at the hill's foot blended
its soft murmur with that of the fir branches hereabouts; else, no
sound that the air could convey beyond the pulsing of a bird's note.

All had alighted, and for a minute or two there was silence. When Peak
had received such geographical instruction as was needful, Warricombe
pointed out to him a mansion conspicuous on the opposite slope of the
Exe valley, the seat of Sir Stafford Northcote. The house had no
architectural beauty, but its solitary lordship amid green pastures and
tracts of thick wood declared the graces and privileges of ancestral
wealth. Standing here alone, Godwin would have surveyed these
possessions of an English aristocrat with more or less bitterness; envy
would, for a moment at all events, have perturbed his pleasure in the
natural scene. Accompanied as he was, his emotion took a form which
indeed was allied to envy, but had nothing painful. He exulted in the
prerogatives of birth and opulence, felt proud of hereditary pride,
gloried that his mind was capable of appreciating to the full those
distinctions which, by the vulgar, are not so much as suspected.
Admitted to equal converse with men and women who represented the best
in English society, he could cast away the evil grudge, the fierce
spirit of self-assertion, and be what nature had proposed in endowing
him with large brain, generous blood, delicate tissues. What room for
malignancy? He was accepted by his peers, and could regard with
tolerance even those ignoble orders of mankind amid whom he had so long
dwelt unrecognised.

A bee hummed past him, and this sound--of all the voices of nature that
which most intenerates--filled his heart to overflowing. Moisture made
his eyes dim, and at the impulse of a feeling of gratitude, such as
only the subtlest care of psychology could fully have explained, he
turned to Buckland, saying:

'But for my meeting with you I should have had a lonely and not very
cheerful holiday. I owe you a great deal.'

Warricombe laughed, but as an Englishman does when he wishes to avoid
show of emotion.

'I am very glad indeed that we did meet. Stay with us over tomorrow. I
only wish I were not obliged to go to London on Wednesday.--Look,
Fanny, isn't that a hawk, over Cowley Bridge?'

'Do you feel you would like to shoot it?' asked Miss Moorhouse--who a
moment ago had very closely examined Peak's face.

'To shoot it--why do you ask that?'

'Confess that you felt the desire.'

'Every man does,' replied Buckland, 'until he has had a moment to
recover himself. That's the human instinct.'

'The male human instinct. Thank you for your honesty.'

They drove on, and by a wide circuit, occasionally stopping for the
view, returned to the Old Tiverton Road, and so home. By this time
Louis Warricombe and Mr. Moorhouse were back from their walk. Reposing
in the company of the ladies, they had partaken of such refreshments as
are lawful at five o'clock, and now welcomed with vivacity the later
arrivals. Moorhouse was something older than Buckland, a sallow-cheeked
man with forehead and eyes expressive of much intelligence. Till of
late he had been a Cambridge tutor, but was now privately occupied in
mathematical pursuits. Louis Warricombe had not yet made up his mind
what profession to follow, and to aid the process of resolve had for
the present devoted himself to physical exercise.

Tea-cup in hand, Godwin seated himself by Sidwell, who began by
inquiring how the drive had pleased him. The fervour of his reply
caused her to smile with special graciousness, and their conversation
was uninterrupted for some minutes. Then Fanny came forward with a book
of mosses, her own collection, which she had mentioned to Peak as they
were talking together in the carriage.

'Do you make special study of any science?' Sidwell asked, when certain
remarks of Godwin's had proved his familiarity with the things he was
inspecting.

'It is long since I worked seriously at anything of the kind,' he
answered; adding in a moment, 'except at chemistry--that only because
it is my business.'

'Organic or inorganic chemistry?' inquired Fanny, with the promptness
of a schoolgirl who wishes to have it known that her ideas are no
longer vague.

'Organic for the most part,' Godwin replied, smiling at her. 'And of
the most disagreeable kind.'

Sidwell reflected, then put another question, but with some diffidence.

'I think you were once fond of geology?'

It was the first allusion to that beginning of their acquaintance, ten
years ago. Peak succeeded in meeting her look with steadiness.

'Yes, I still like it.'

'Father's collections have been much improved since you saw them at
Thornhaw.'

'I hope Mr. Warricombe will let me see them.'

Buckland came up and made an apology for drawing his friend aside.

'Will you let us send for your traps? You may just as well have a room
here for a night or two.'

Perpetually imagining some kind chance that might associate him with
civilised people, Godwin could not even pack his portmanteau for a
ramble to Land's End without stowing away a dress suit. He was thus
saved what would have been an embarrassment of special annoyance.
Without hesitation, he accepted Buckland's offer, and named the hotel
at which the luggage was deposited.

'All right; the messenger shall explain. Our name's well enough known
to them. If you would like to look up my father in his study, he'll be
delighted to go over his collections with you. You still care for that
kind of thing?'

'Most certainly. How can you doubt it?'

Buckland smiled, and gave no other reply.

'Ask Fanny to show you the way when you care to go.' And he left the
room.