CHAPTER I


'Why are you obstinately silent? [wrote Earwaker, in a letter addressed
to Godwin at his Peckham lodgings]. I take it for granted that you must
by this time be back from your holiday. Why haven't you replied to my
letter of a fortnight ago? Nothing yet from _The Critical_. If you are
really at work as usual, come and see me to-morrow evening, any time
after eight. The posture of my affairs grows dubious; the shadow of
Kenyon thickens about me. In all seriousness I think I shall be driven
from _The Weekly Post_ before long. My quarrels with Runcorn are too
frequent, and his blackguardism keeps more than pace with the times.
Come or write, for I want to know how things go with you.

_Tuissimus_, J.E.E.'

Peak read this at breakfast on a Saturday morning. It was early in
September, and three weeks had elapsed since his return from the west
of England. Upon the autumn had fallen a blight of cold and rainy
weather, which did not enhance the cheerfulness of daily journeying
between Peckham Rye and Rotherhithe. When it was necessary for him to
set forth to the train, he muttered imprecations, for a mood of
inactivity possessed him; he would gladly have stayed in his
comfortable sitting-room, idling over books or only occupied with
languid thought.

In the afternoon he was at liberty to follow his impulse, and this
directed him to the British Museum, whither of late he had several
times resorted as a reader. Among the half-dozen books for which he
applied was one in German, Reusch's _Bibel und Natur_. After a little
dallying, he became absorbed in this work, and two or three hours
passed before its hold on his attention slackened. He seldom changed
his position; the volume was propped against others, and he sat bending
forward, his arms folded upon the desk. When he was thus deeply
engaged, his face had a hard, stern aspect; if by chance his eye
wandered for a moment, its look seemed to express resentment of
interruption.

At length he threw himself back with a sudden yielding to weariness,
crossed his legs, sank together in the chair, and for half-an-hour
brooded darkly. A fit of yawning admonished him that it was time to
quit the atmosphere of study. He betook himself to a restaurant in the
Strand, and thence about eight o'clock made his way to Staple Inn,
where the journalist gave him cheerful welcome.

'Day after day I have meant to write,' thus he excused himself. 'But I
had really nothing to say.'

'You don't look any better for your holiday,' Earwaker remarked.

'Holiday? Oh, I had forgotten all about it. When do _you_ go?'

'The situation is comical. I feel sure that if I leave town, my
connection with the _Post_ will come to an end. I shall have a note
from Runcorn saying that we had better take this opportunity of
terminating my engagement. On the whole I should be glad, yet I can't
make up my mind to be ousted by Kenyon--that's what it means. They want
to get me away, but I stick on, postponing holiday from week to week.
Runcorn can't decide to send me about my business, yet every leader I
write enrages him. But for Kenyon, I should gain my point; I feel sure
of it. It's one of those cases in which homicide would be justified by
public interest. If Kenyon gets my place, the paper becomes at once an
organ of ruffiandom, the delight of the blackguardry.'

'How's the circulation?' inquired Peak.

'Pretty sound; that adds to the joke. This series of stories by
Doubleday has helped us a good deal, and my contention is, if we can
keep financially right by help of this kind, why not make a little
sacrifice for the sake of raising our political tone? Runcorn won't see
it; he listens eagerly to Kenyon's assurance that we might sell several
thousand more by striking the true pot-house note.'

'Then pitch the thing over! Wash your hands, and go to cleaner work.'

'The work I am doing is clean enough,' replied Earwaker. 'Let me have
my way, and I can make the paper a decent one and a useful one. I
shan't easily find another such chance.'

'Your idealism has a strong root,' said Godwin, rather contemptuously.
'I half envy you. There must be a distinct pleasure in believing that
any intellectual influence will exalt the English democracy.'

'I'm not sure that I do believe it, but I enjoy the experiment. The
chief pleasure, I suppose, is in fighting Runcorn and Kenyon.'

'They are too strong for you, Earwaker. They have the spirit of the age
to back them up.'

The journalist became silent; he smiled, but the harassment of conflict
marked his features.

'I hear nothing about "The New Sophistry",' he remarked, when Godwin
had begun to examine some books that lay on the table. 'Dolby has the
trick of keeping manuscripts a long time. Everything that seems at the
first glance tolerable, he sends to the printer, then muses over it at
his leisure. Probably your paper is in type.'

'I don't care a rap whether it is or not. What do you think of this
book of Oldwinkle's?'

He was holding a volume of humorous stories, which had greatly taken
the fancy of the public.

'It's uncommonly good,' replied the journalist, laughing. 'I had a
prejudice against the fellow, but he has overcome me. It's more than
good farce--something like really strong humour here and there.'

'I quite believe it,' said Peak, 'yet I couldn't read a page. Whatever
the mob enjoys is at once spoilt for me, however good I should
otherwise think it. I am sick of seeing and hearing the man's name.'

Earwaker shook his head in deprecation.

'Narrow, my boy. One must be able to judge and enjoy impartially.'

'I know it, but I shall never improve. This book seems to me to have a
bad smell; it looks mauled with dirty fingers. I despise Oldwinkle for
his popularity. To make them laugh, and to laugh _with_ them--pah!'

They debated this point for some time, Peak growing more violent,
though his friend preserved a smiling equanimity. A tirade of virulent
contempt, in which Godwin exhibited all his powers of savage eloquence,
was broken by a visitor's summons at the door.

'Here's Malkin,' said the journalist; 'you'll see each other at last.'

Peak could not at once command himself to the look and tone desirable
in meeting a stranger; leaning against the mantelpiece, he gazed with a
scowl of curiosity at the man who presented himself, and when he shook
hands, it was in silence. But Malkin made speech from the others
unnecessary for several minutes. With animated voice and gesture, he
poured forth apologies for his failure to keep the appointment of six
or seven weeks ago.

'Only the gravest call of duty could have kept me away, I do assure
you! No doubt Earwaker has informed you of the circumstances. I
telegraphed--I think I telegraphed; didn't I, Earwaker?'

'I have some recollection of a word or two of scant excuse,' replied
the journalist.

'But I implore you to consider the haste I was in,' cried Malkin; 'not
five minutes, Mr. Peak, to book, to register luggage, to do everything;
not five minutes, I protest! But here we are at last. Let us talk! Let
us talk!'

He seated himself with an air of supreme enjoyment, and began to cram
the bowl of a large pipe from a bulky pouch.

'How stands the fight with Kenyon and Co.?' he cried, as soon as the
tobacco was glowing.

Earwaker briefly repeated what he had told Peak.

'Hold out! No surrender and no compromise! What's your opinion, Mr
Peak, on the abstract question? Is a popular paper likely, or not, to
be damaged in its circulation by improvement of style and tone--within
the limits of discretion?'

'I shouldn't be surprised if it were,' Peak answered, drily.

'I'm afraid you're right. There's no use in blinking truths, however
disagreeable. But, for Earwaker, that isn't the main issue. What he has
to do is to assert himself. Every man's first duty is to assert
himself. At all events, this is how I regard the matter. I am all for
individualism, for the development of one's personality at whatever
cost. No compromise on points of faith! Earwaker has his ideal of
journalistic duty, and in a fight with fellows like Runcorn and Kenyon
he must stand firm as a rock.'

'I can't see that he's called upon to fight at all,' said Peak. 'He's
in a false position; let him get out of it.'

'A false position? I can't see that. No man better fitted than Earwaker
to raise the tone of Radical journalism. Here's a big Sunday newspaper
practically in his hands; it seems to me that the circumstances give
him a grand opportunity of making his force felt. What are we all
seeking but an opportunity for striking out with effect?'

Godwin listened with a sceptical smile, and made answer in slow,
careless tones.

'Earwaker happens to be employed and paid by certain capitalists to
increase the sale of their paper.'

'My dear sir!' cried the other, bouncing upon his seat. 'How can you
take such a view? A great newspaper surely cannot be regarded as a mere
source of income. These capitalists declare that they have at heart the
interests of the working classes; so has Earwaker, and he is far better
able than they to promote those interests. His duty is to apply their
money to the best use, morally speaking. If he were lukewarm in the
matter, I should be the first to advise his retirement; but this fight
is entirely congenial to him. I trust he will hold his own to the last
possible moment.'

'You must remember,' put in the journalist, with a look of amusement,
'that Peak has no sympathy with Radicalism.'

'I lament it, but that does not affect my argument. If you were a high
Tory, I should urge you just as strongly to assert yourself. Surely you
agree with this point of mine, Mr. Peak? You admit that a man must
develop whatever strength is in him.'

'I'm not at all sure of that.'

Malkin fixed himself sideways in the chair, and examined his
collocutor's face earnestly. He endeavoured to subdue his excitement to
the tone of courteous debate, but the words that at length escaped him
were humorously blunt.

'Then of what _are_ you sure?'

'Of nothing.'

'Now we touch bottom!' cried Malkin. 'Philosophically speaking, I agree
with you. But we have to live our lives, and I suppose we must direct
ourselves by some conscious principle.'

'I don't see the necessity,' Peak replied, still in an impassive tone.
'We may very well be guided by circumstances as they arise. To be sure,
there's a principle in that, but I take it you mean something
different.'

'Yes I do. I hold that the will must direct circumstances, not receive
its impulse from them. How, then, are we to be guided? What do you set
before yourself?'

'To get through life with as much satisfaction and as little pain as
possible.'

'You are a hedonist, then. Well and good! Then that is your conscious
principle'--

'No, it isn't.'

'How am I to understand you?'

'By recognising that a man's intellectual and moral principles as
likely as not tend to anything but his happiness.'

'I can't admit it!' exclaimed Malkin, leaping from his chair. 'What
_is_ happiness?'

'I don't know.'

'Earwaker, _what_ is happiness? What _is_ happiness?'

'I really don't know,' answered the journalist, mirthfully.

'This is trifling with a grave question. We all know perfectly well
that happiness is the conscious exertion of individual powers. Why is
there so much suffering under our present social system? Because the
majority of men are crushed to a dead level of mechanical toil, with no
opportunity of developing their special faculties. Give a man scope,
and happiness is put within his reach.'

'What do you mean by scope?' inquired Godwin.

'Scope? Scope? Why, room to expand. The vice of our society is
hypocrisy; it comes of over-crowding. When a man isn't allowed to be
himself, he takes refuge in a mean imitation of those other men who
appear to be better off. That was what sent me off to South America. I
got into politics, and found that I was in danger of growing dishonest,
of compromising, and toadying. In the wilderness, I found myself
again.--Do you seriously believe that happiness can be obtained by
ignoring one's convictions?'

He addressed the question to both, snuffing the air with head thrown
back.

'What if you have no convictions?' asked Peak.

'Then you are incapable of happiness in any worthy sense! You may
graze, but you will never feast.'

The listeners joined in laughter, and Malkin, after a moment's
hesitation, allowed his face to relax in good-humoured sympathy.

'Now look here!' he cried. 'You--Earwaker; suppose you sent conscience
to the devil, and set yourself to please Runcorn by increasing the
circulation of your paper by whatever means. You would flourish,
undoubtedly. In a short time you would be chief editor, and your
pockets would burst with money. But what about your peace of mind? What
about happiness?'

'Why, I'm disposed to agree with Peak,' answered the journalist. 'If I
_could_ take that line, I should be a happier man than
conscientiousness will ever make me.'

Malkin swelled with indignation.

'You don't mean it! You are turning a grave argument into
jest!--Where's my hat? Where the devil is my hat? Send for me again
when you are disposed to talk seriously.'

He strode towards the door, but Earwaker arrested him with a shout.

'You're leaving your pipe!'

'So I am. Where is it?--Did I tell you where I bought this pipe?'

'No. What's the wood?'

On the instant Malkin fell into a cheerful vein of reminiscence. In
five minutes he was giving a rapturous description of tropical scenes,
laughing joyously as he addressed now one now the other of his
companions.

'I hear you have a mind to see those countries, Mr. Peak,' he said at
length. 'If you care for a travelling companion--rather short-tempered,
but you'll pardon that--pray give me the preference. I should enjoy
above all things to travel with a man of science.'

'It's very doubtful whether I shall ever get so far,' Godwin replied,
musingly.

And, as he spoke, he rose to take leave. Earwaker's protest that it was
not yet ten o'clock did not influence him.

'I want to reflect on the meaning of happiness,' he said, extending his
hand to Malkin; and, in spite of the smile, his face had a sombre cast.

The two who were left of course discussed him.

'You won't care much for Peak,' said Earwaker. 'He and I suit each
other, because there's a good deal of indifferentism in both of us.
Moral earnestness always goes against the grain with him; I've noticed
it frequently.'

'I'm sorry I spoke so dogmatically. It wasn't altogether good manners.
Suppose I write him a short letter, just expressing my regret for
having been led away'--

'Needless, needless,' laughed the journalist. 'He thinks all the better
of you for your zeal. But happiness is a sore point with him; few men,
I should think, have known less of it. I can't imagine any
circumstances which would make him thoroughly at peace with himself and
the world.'

'Poor fellow! You can see something of that in his face. Why doesn't he
get married?'

'A remarkable suggestion!--By the way, why don't _you_?'.

'My dear boy, there's nothing I wish more, but it's a business of such
fearful precariousness. I'm one of those men whom marriage will either
make or ruin. You know my characteristics; the slightest check upon my
independence, and all's up with me. The woman I marry must be perfectly
reasonable, perfectly good-tempered; she must have excellent education,
and every delicacy of breeding. Where am I to find this paragon?'

'Society is open to you.'

'True, but I am not open to society. I don't take kindly to the people
of my own class. No, I tell you what--my only chance of getting a
suitable wife is to train some very young girl for the purpose. Don't
misunderstand me, for heaven's sake! I mean that I must make a
friendship with some schoolgirl in whose education I can have a voice,
whose relatives will permit me to influence her mind and develop her
character. What do you think of this idea?'

'Not bad, but it demands patience.'

'And who more patient than I? But let us talk of that poor Mrs. Jacox
and her girls. You feel that you know them pretty well from my letters,
don't you? Nothing more monstrous can be imagined than the treatment to
which this poor woman has been subjected! I couldn't have believed that
such dishonesty and brutality were possible in English families of
decent position. Her husband deserted her, her brother robbed her, her
sister-in-law libelled her,--the whole story is nauseating!'

'You're quite sure that she tells you the truth?'

Malkin glared with sudden resentment.

'The truth? What! you also desire to calumniate her? For shame,
Earwaker! A poor widow toiling to support herself in a foreign country,
with two children dependent on her.'

'Yes, yes, yes; but you seem to know very little of her.'

'I know her perfectly, and all her circumstances!'

Mrs. Jacox was the mother of the two girls whom Malkin had escorted to
Rouen, after an hour or so of all but casual acquaintance. She and her
history had come in a very slight degree under the notice of certain
good-natured people with whom Malkin was on friendly terms, and hearing
that the children, Bella and Lily, aged fourteen and twelve
respectively, were about to undertake alone a journey to the Continent,
the erratic hero felt it incumbent upon him to see them safe at their
mother's side. Instead of returning forthwith, he lingered in Normandy
for several weeks, striking off at length, on the summons of a friend,
to Orleans, whence he was only to-day returned. Two or three letters
had kept Earwaker informed of his movements. Of Mrs. Jacox he wrote as
he now spoke, with compassionate respect, and the girls, according to
him, were exquisite models of budding maidenhood.

'You haven't told me,' said Earwaker, calmly fronting the indignant
outburst, 'what her circumstances are--at present.'

'She assists an English lady in the management of a boardinghouse,'
Malkin replied, with an air which forbade trivial comment. 'Bella and
Lily will of course continue their studies. I daresay I shall run over
now and then to see them.'

'May I, without offence, inquire if either of these young ladies seems
suitable for the ideal training of which you spoke?'

Malkin smiled thoughtfully. He stood with his legs apart and stroked
his blond beard.

'The surmise is not unnatural. Well, I confess that Bella has inspired
me with no little interest. She is rather mature, unfortunately; I wish
she had been Lily's age. We shall see; we shall see.'

Musing, he refilled his pipe, and gossip was prolonged till something
after one o'clock. Malkin was never known to retire willingly from an
evening's congenial talk until the small hours were in progress.

Peak, on reaching home about eleven, was surprised to see a light in
his sitting-room window. As he entered, his landlady informed him that
Mr. Moxey had been waiting upstairs for an hour or two. Christian was
reading. He laid down the book and rose languidly. His face was
flushed, and he spoke with a laugh which suggested that a fit of
despondency (as occasionally happened) had tempted him to excess in
cordials. Godwin understood these signs. He knew that his friend's
intellect was rather brightened than impaired by such stimulus, and he
affected not to be conscious of any peculiarity.

'As you wouldn't come to me,' Christian began, 'I had no choice but to
come to you. My visit isn't unwelcome, I hope?'

'Certainly not. But how are you going to get home? You know the time?'

'Don't trouble. I shan't go to bed to-night. Let me sit here and read,
will you? If I feel tired I can lie down on the sofa. What a delightful
book this is! I must get it.'

It was a history of the Italian Renaissance, recently published.

'Where does this phrase come from?' he continued, pointing to a scrap
of paper, used as a book-mark, on which Godwin had pencilled a note.
The words were: '_Foris ut moris, intus ut libet_.'

'It's mentioned there,' Peak replied, 'as the motto of those humanists
who outwardly conformed to the common faith.'

'I see. All very well when the Inquisition was flourishing, but sounds
ignoble nowadays.'

'Do you think so? In a half-civilised age, whether the sixteenth or the
nineteenth century, a wise man may do worse than adopt it.'

'Better be honest, surely?'

Peak stood for a moment as if in doubt, then exclaimed irritably:

'Honest? Honest? Who is or can be honest? Who truly declares himself?
When a man has learnt that truth is indeterminable, how is it more
moral to go about crying that you don't believe a certain dogma than to
concede that the dogma may possibly be true? This new morality of the
agnostics is mere paltry conceit. Why must I make solemn declaration
that I don't believe in absolute knowledge? I might as well be called
upon to inform all my acquaintances how I stand with regard to the
theories of chemical affinity. One's philosophy has nothing to do with
the business of life. If I chose to become a Church of England
clergyman, what moral objection could be made?'

This illustration was so amusing to Moxey, that his surprise at what
preceded gave way to laughter.

'I wonder,' he exclaimed, 'that you never seriously thought of a
profession for which you are so evidently cut out.'

Godwin kept silence; his face had darkened, and he seated himself with
sullen weariness.

'Tell me what you've been doing,' resumed Moxey. 'Why haven't I heard
from you?'

'I should have come in a day or two. I thought you were probably out of
town.'

'Her husband is ill,' said the other, by way of reply. He leaned
forward with his arms upon the table, and gazed at Godwin with eyes of
peculiar brightness.

'Ill, is he?' returned Godwin, with slow interest. 'In the same way as
before?'

'Yes, but much worse.'

Christian paused; and when he again spoke it was hurriedly, confusedly.

'How can I help getting excited about it? How can I behave decently?
You're the only man I ever speak to on the subject, and no doubt I both
weary and disgust you; but I _must_ speak to some one. My nerves are
strung beyond endurance; it's only by speaking that I can ease myself
from the intolerable strain.'

'Have you seen her lately?'

'Yesterday, for a moment, in the street. It's ten months since the last
meeting.'

'Well,' remarked Godwin, abruptly, 'it's probable the man will die one
of these days, then your trials will have a happy end. I see no harm in
hoping that his life may be short--that's a conventional feeling. If
two people can be benefited by the death of a single person, why
shouldn't we be glad in the prospect of his dying? Not of his
suffering--that's quite another thing. But die he must; and to curtail
the life of a being who at length wholly ceases to exist is no injury.
You can't injure a nonentity. Do you think I should take it ill if I
knew that some persons were wishing my death? Why, look, if ever I
crush a little green fly that crawls upon me in the fields, at once I
am filled with envy of its fate--sincerest envy. To have passed so
suddenly from being into nothingness--how blessed an extinction! To
feel in that way, instinctively, in the very depths of your soul, is to
be a true pessimist. If I had ever doubted my sincerity in pessimism,
this experience, several times repeated, would have reassured me.'

Christian covered his face, and brooded for a long time, whilst Godwin
sat with his eyes on vacancy.

'Come and see us to-morrow,' said the former, at length.

'Perhaps.';

'Why do you keep away?'

'I'm in no mood for society.'

'We'll have no one. Only Marcella and I.'

Again a long silence.

'Marcella is going in for comparative philology,' Christian resumed,
with the gentle tone in which he invariably spoke of his sister. 'What
a mind that girl has! I never knew any woman of half her powers.'

Godwin said nothing.

'No,' continued the other fervently, 'nor of half her goodness. I
sometimes think that no mortal could come nearer to our ideal of moral
justice and purity. If it were not for her, I should long ago have gone
to perdition, in one way or another. It's her strength, not my own,
that has saved me. I daresay you know this?'

'There's some truth in it, I believe,' Peak answered, his eye wandering.

'See how circumstances can affect one's judgment. If, just about the
time I first knew you, I had abandoned myself to a life of sottish
despair, of course I should have charged Constance with the blame of
it. Now that I have struggled on, I can see that she has been a
blessing to me instead of a curse. If Marcella has given me strength, I
have to thank Constance for the spiritual joy which otherwise I should
never have known.'

Peak uttered a short laugh.

'That is only saying that she _might_ have been ruinous, but in the
course of circumstances has proved helpful. I envy your power of
deriving comfort from such reflections.'

'Well, we view things differently. I have the habit of looking to the
consolatory facts of life, you to the depressing. There's an
unfortunate lack in you, Peak; you seem insensible to female influence,
and I believe that is closely connected with your desperate pessimism.'

Godwin laughed again, this time with mocking length of note. 'Come now,
isn't it true?' urged the other. 'Sincerely, do you care for women at
all?'

'Perhaps not.'

'A grave misfortune, depend upon it! It accounts for nearly everything
that is unsatisfactory in your life. If you had ever been sincerely
devoted to a woman, be assured your powers would have developed in a
way of which you have no conception. It's no answer to tell me that _I_
am still a mere trifler, never likely to do anything of account; I
haven't it in me to be anything better, and I might easily have become
much worse. But you might have made yourself a great position--I mean,
you _might_ do so; you are still very young. If only you knew the
desire of a woman's help.'

'You really think so?' said Godwin, with grave irony.

'I am sure of it! There's no harm in repeating what you have often told
me--your egoism oppresses you. A woman's influence takes one out of
oneself. No man can be a better authority on this than I. For more than
eleven years I have worshipped one woman with absolute faithfulness'----

'Absolute?' interrupted Godwin, bluntly.

'What exception occurs to you?'

'As you challenge inquiry, forgive me for asking what your interest was
in one of your cousins at Twybridge?'

Christian started, and averted his face with a look of embarrassment.

'Do you mean to say that you knew anything about that?'

'I was always an observer,' Peak replied, smiling. 'You don't remember,
perhaps, that I happened to be present when a letter had just arrived
for you at your uncle's house--a letter which evidently disturbed you?'

'This is astonishing! Peak, you're a terrible fellow! Heaven forbid
that I should ever be at your mercy! Yes, you are quite right,' he
continued, despondently. 'But that was no real unfaithfulness. I don't
quite know how to explain it. I _did_ make love to poor Janet, and with
the result that I have never since seen any of the family. My uncle,
when he found I had drawn back, was very savage--naturally enough.
Marcella and I never again went to Twybridge. I liked Janet; she was a
good, kind girl. I believed just then that my love for Constance was
hopeless; my mood impelled me to the conviction that the best thing I
could do was to marry Janet and settle down to a peaceful domestic
life. Then came that letter--it was from Constance herself. It meant
nothing, yet it was enough to revive all my hopes. I rushed off--! How
brutally I had behaved! Poor little Janet!'

He let his face fall upon his hands.

'Allow me an indiscreet question,' said Peak, after a silence. 'Have
you any founded hope of marrying Constance if she becomes a widow?'

Christian started and looked up with wide eyes.

'Hope? Every hope! I have the absolute assurance of her love.'

'I see.'

'But I mustn't mislead you,' pursued the other, hurriedly. 'Our
relations are absolutely pure. I have only allowed myself to see her at
very long intervals. Why shouldn't I tell you? It was less than a year
after her marriage; I found her alone in a room in a friend's house;
her eyes were red with weeping. I couldn't help holding my hand to her.
She took it, and held it for a moment, and looked at me steadily, and
whispered my name--that was all. I knew then that she repented of her
marriage--who can say what led her into it? I was poor, you know;
perhaps--but in spite of all, she _did_ love me. There has never since
been anything like a scene of emotion between us--_that_ her conscience
couldn't allow. She is a noble-minded woman, and has done her duty. But
if she is free'--

He quivered with passionate feeling.

'And you are content,' said Godwin, drily, 'to have wasted ten years of
your life for such a possibility?'

'Wasted!' Christian exclaimed. 'Come, come, Peak; why _will_ you affect
this wretched cynicism? Is it waste of years to have lived with the
highest and purest ideal perpetually before one's mind? What can a man
do better than, having found an admirable woman, to worship her
thenceforth, and defy every temptation that could lead him astray? I
don't like to seem boastful, but I _have_ lived purely and devotedly.
And if the test endured to the end of my life, I could sustain it. Is
the consciousness of my love nothing to Constance? Has it not helped
her?'

Such profound sincerity was astonishing to Peak. He did not admire it,
for it seemed to him, in this case at all events, the fatal weakness of
a character it was impossible not to love. Though he could not declare
his doubts, he thought it more than probable that this Laura of the
voiceless Petrarch was unworthy of such constancy, and that she had no
intention whatever of rewarding it, even if the opportunity arrived.
But this was the mere speculation of a pessimist; he might be
altogether wrong, for he had never denied the existence of high virtue,
in man or woman.

'There goes midnight!' he remarked, turning from the subject. 'You
can't sleep, neither can I. Why shouldn't we walk into town?'

'By all means; on condition that you will come home with me, and spend
to-morrow there.'

'Very well.'

They set forth, and with varied talk, often broken by long silences,
made their way through sleeping suburbs to the dark valley of Thames.

There passed another month, during which Peak was neither seen nor
heard of by his friends. One evening in October, as he sat studying at
the British Museum, a friendly voice claimed his attention. He rose
nervously and met the searching eye of Buckland Warricombe.

'I had it in mind to write to you,' said the latter. 'Since we parted
down yonder I have been running about a good deal, with few days in
town. Do you often read here?'

'Generally on Saturday afternoon.'

Buckland glanced at the open volume, and caught a heading, 'Apologetic
Theology.'

'Still at the works?'

'Yes; I shall be there till Christmas--no longer.'

'Are you by chance disengaged to-morrow? Could you dine with me? I
shall be alone; perhaps you don't mind that? We could exchange views on
"fate, free-will, foreknowledge absolute".'

Godwin accepted the invitation, and Warricombe, unable to linger, took
leave of him.

They met the next evening in Buckland's rooms, not far from the Houses
of Parliament. Commonplace comfort was the note of these quarters. Peak
wondered that a man who had it in his power to surround himself with
evidences of taste should be content to dwell thus. His host seemed to
detect this thought in the glances Godwin cast about him.

'Nothing but a _pied-a-terre_. I have been here three or four years,
but I don't think of it as a home. I suppose I shall settle somewhere
before long: yet, on the whole, what does it matter where one lives?
There's something in the atmosphere of our time that makes one
indisposed to strike roots in the old way. Who knows how long there'll
be such a thing as real property? We are getting to think of ourselves
as lodgers; it's as well to be indifferent about a notice to quit.'

'Many people would still make a good fight for the old homes,' replied
Peak.

'Yes; I daresay I should myself, if I were a family man. A wife and
children are strong persuasions to conservatism. In those who have
anything, that's to say. Let the families who have nothing learn how
they stand in point of numbers, and we shall see what we shall see.'

'And you are doing your best to teach them that.'

Buckland smiled.

'A few other things at the same time. One isn't necessarily an
anarchist, you know.'

'What enormous faith you must have in the metaphysical powers of the
multitude!'

'Trenchant! But say, rather, in the universal self-interest. That's the
trait of human nature which we have in mind when we speak of
enlightenment. The aim of practical Radicalism is to instruct men's
selfishness. Astonishing how capable it is of being instructed! The
mistake of the Socialist lies in his crediting men with far too much
self-esteem, far too little perception of their own limits. The
characteristic of mankind at large is humility.'

Peak began to understand his old acquaintance; he had imagined him less
acute. Gratified by the smile of interest, Warricombe added:

'There are forces of madness; I have shown you that I make allowance
for them. But they are only dangerous so long as privilege allies
itself with hypocrisy. The task of the modern civiliser is to sweep
away sham idealisms.'

'I agree with you,' Godwin replied.

With sudden change of mood, Buckland began to speak of an indifferent
topic of the day, and in a few minutes they sat down to dinner.

Not till the welcome tobacco blended its aroma with that of coffee did
a frankly personal note sound in their conversation.

'So at Christmas you are free,' said Warricombe. 'You still think of
leaving London?'

'I have decided to go down into Devonshire.'

'The seaside?'

'I shall stay first of all in Exeter,' Godwin replied, with
deliberation; 'one can get hold of books there.'

'Yes, especially of the ecclesiastical colour.'

'You are still unable to regard my position with anything but
contempt?' Peak asked, looking steadily at the critical face.

'Come now; what does it all mean? Of course I quite understand how
tolerant the Church is becoming: I know what latitude it permits in its
servants. But what do you propose to yourself?'

'Precisely what you call the work of the civiliser--to attack sham
ideals.'

'As for instance--?'

'The authority of the mob,' answered Peak, suavely.

'Your clericalism is political, then?'

'To a great extent.'

'I discern a vague sort of consistency in this. You regard the Church
formulas as merely symbolical--useful for the purposes of the day?'

'Rather for the purposes of eternity.'

'In the human sense.'

'In every sense.'

Warricombe perceived that no directness of questioning would elicit
literal response, and on the whole this relieved him. To hear Godwin
Peak using the language of a fervent curate would have excited in him
something more than disgust. It did not seem impossible that a nature
like Peak's--intellectually arrogant, vehemently anti-popular--should
have been attracted by the traditions, the social prestige, of the
Anglican Church; nor at all unlikely that a mind so constituted should
justify a seeming acceptance of dogmas, which in the strict sense it
despised. But he was made uneasy by his ignorance of Peak's private
life during the years since their parting at College. He did not like
to think of the possible establishment of intimacy between this man of
low origin, uncertain career, boundless ambition, and the household of
Martin Warricombe. There could be no doubt that Peak had decided to go
to Exeter because of the social prospects recently opened to him. In
the vulgar phrase, he had probably 'taken stock' of Mr. Warricombe's
idiosyncrasy, and saw therein a valuable opportunity for a theological
student, who at the same time was a devotee of natural science. To be
sure, the people at Exeter could be put on their guard. On the other
hand, Peak had plainly avowed his desire to form social connections of
the useful kind; in his position such an aim was essential, a mere
matter of course.

Godwin's voice interrupted this train of thought.

'Let me ask you a plain question. You have twice been kind enough to
introduce me to your home as a friend of yours. Am I guilty of
presumption in hoping that your parents will continue to regard me as
an acquaintance? I trust there's no need to assure you that I know the
meaning of discretion.'

An appeal to Buckland's generosity seldom failed. Yes, it was true that
he had more than once encouraged the hope now frankly expressed.
Indulging a correspondent frankness, he might explain that Peak's
position was so distasteful to him that it disturbed the future with
many kinds of uncertainty. But this would be churlish. He must treat
his guest as a gentleman, so long as nothing compelled him to take the
less agreeable view.

'My dear Peak, let us have none of these formalities. My parents have
distinctly invited you to go and see them whenever you are in the
neighbourhood. I am quite sure they will help to make your stay in
Exeter a pleasant one.'

Therewith closed the hazardous dialogue. Warricombe turned at once to a
safe topic--that of contemporary fiction, and they chatted pleasantly
enough for the rest of the evening.

Not many days after this, Godwin received by post an envelope which
contained certain proof sheets, and therewith a note in which the
editor of _The Critical Review_ signified his acceptance of a paper
entitled 'The New Sophistry'. The communication was originally
addressed to Earwaker, who had scribbled at the foot, 'Correct, if you
are alive, and send back to Dolby.'

The next morning he did not set out as usual for Rotherhithe. Through
the night he had not closed his eyes; he was in a state of nervousness
which bordered on fever. A dozen times he had read over the proofs,
with throbbing pulse, with exultant self-admiration: but the printer's
errors which had caught his eye, and a few faults of phrase, were still
uncorrected. What a capital piece of writing it was! What a
flagellation of M'Naughten and all his tribe! If this did not rouse
echoes in the literary world--

Through the long day he sat in languor or paced his room like one made
restless by pain. Only when the gloom of nightfall obliged him to light
his lamp did he at length sit down to the table and carefully revise
the proofs, pen in hand. When he had made up the packet for post, he
wrote to Earwaker.

'I had forgotten all about this thing. Proofs have gone to Dolby. I
have not signed; probably he would object to my doing so. As it is, the
paper can be ascribed to anyone, and attention thus excited. We shall
see paragraphs attributing it to men of mark--perhaps scandal will fix
it on a bishop. In any case, don't let out the secret. I beg this
seriously, and for a solid reason. Not a word to anyone, however
intimate. If Dolby betrays _your_ name, grin and bear it. I depend upon
your friendship.'