CHAPTER II


In his acceptance of Sidwell's reply, Peak did not care to ask himself
whether the delay of its arrival had any meaning one way or another.
Decency would hardly have permitted her to answer such a letter by
return of post; of course she waited a day or so.

But the interval meant more than this.

Sylvia Moorhouse was staying with her friend. The death of Mrs
Moorhouse, and the marriage of the mathematical brother, had left
Sylvia homeless, though not in any distressing sense; her inclination
was to wander for a year or two, and she remained in England only until
the needful arrangements could be concluded.

'You had better come with me,' she said to Sidwell, as they walked
together on the lawn after luncheon.

The other shook her head.

'Indeed, you had better.--What are you doing here? What are you going
to make of your life?'

'I don't know.'

'Precisely. Yet one ought to live on some kind of plan. I think it is
time you got away from Exeter; it seems to me you are finding its
atmosphere _morbific_.'

Sidwell laughed at the allusion.

'You know,' she said, 'that the reverend gentleman is shortly to be
married?'

'Oh yes, I have heard all about it. But is he forsaking the Church?'

'Retiring only for a time, they say.'

'Forgive the question, Sidwell--did he honour you with a proposal?'

'Indeed, no!'

'Some one told me it was imminent, not long ago.'

'Quite a mistake,' Sidwell answered, with her grave smile. 'Mr Chilvers
had a singular manner with women in general. It was meant, perhaps, for
subtle flattery; he may have thought it the most suitable return for
the female worship he was accustomed to receive.'

Mr. Warricombe was coming towards them. He brought a new subject of
conversation, and as they talked the trio drew near to the gate which
led into the road. The afternoon postman was just entering; Mr
Warricombe took from him two letters.

'One for you, Sylvia, and--one for you, Sidwell.'

A slight change in his voice caused Sidwell to look at her father as he
handed her the letter. In the same moment she recognised the writing of
the address. It was Godwin Peak's, and undoubtedly her father knew it.

With a momentary hesitation Mr. Warricombe continued his talk from the
point at which he had broken off, but he avoided his daughter's look,
and Sidwell was too well aware of an uneasiness which had fallen upon
him. In a few minutes he brought the chat to an end, and walked away
towards the house.

Sidwell held her letter tightly. Conversation was no longer possible
for her; she had a painful throbbing of the heart, and felt that her
face must be playing traitor. Fortunately, Sylvia found it necessary to
write a reply to the missive she had received, and her companion was
soon at liberty to seek solitude.

For more than an hour she remained alone. However unemotional the
contents of the letter, its arrival would have perturbed her seriously,
as in the two previous instances; what she found on opening the
envelope threw her into so extreme an agitation that it was long before
she could subdue the anguish of disorder in all her senses. She had
tried to believe that Godwin Peak was henceforth powerless to affect
her in this way, write what he would. The romance of her life was over;
time had brought the solution of difficulties to which she looked
forward; she recognised the inevitable, as doubtless did Godwin also.
But all this was self-deception. The passionate letter delighted as
much as it tortured her; in secret her heart had desired this, though
reason suppressed and denied the hope. No longer need she remember with
pangs of shame the last letter she had written, and the cold response;
once again things were as they should be--the lover pleading before
her--she with the control of his fate. The injury to her pride was
healed, and in the thought that perforce she must answer with a final
'No', she found at first more of solace than of distress.

Subsidence of physical suffering allowed her to forget this emotion, in
its nature unavowable. She could think of the news Godwin sent, could
torment herself with interpretations of Marcella Moxey's behaviour, and
view in detail the circumstances which enabled Godwin to urge a formal
suit. Among her various thoughts there recurred frequently a regret
that this letter had not reached her, like the other two, unobserved.
Her father had now learnt that she was in correspondence with the
disgraced man; to keep silence would be to cause him grave trouble; yet
how much better if fortune had only once more favoured her, so that the
story might have remained her secret, from beginning to end.

For was not this the end?----

At the usual time she went to the drawing-room, and somehow succeeded
in conversing as though nothing had disturbed her. Mr Warricombe was
not seen till dinner. When he came forth, Sidwell noticed his air of
preoccupation, and that he avoided addressing her. The evening asked
too much of her self-command; she again withdrew, and only came back
when the household was ready for retiring. In bidding her father
goodnight, she forced herself to meet his gaze; he looked at her with
troubled inquiry, and she felt her cheek redden.

'Do you want to get rid of me?' asked Sylvia, with wonted frankness,
when her friend drew near.

'No. Let us go to the glass-house.'

Up there on the roof Sidwell often found a retreat when her thoughts
were troublesome. Fitfully, she had resumed her water-colour drawing,
but as a rule her withdrawal to the glass-house was for reading or
reverie. Carrying a small lamp, she led the way before Sylvia, and they
sat down in the chairs which on one occasion had been occupied by
Buckland Warricombe and Peak.

The wind, rarely silent in this part of Devon, blew boisterously from
the south-west. A far-off whistle, that of a train speeding up the
valley on its way from Plymouth, heightened the sense of retirement and
quietude always to be enjoyed at night here under the stars.

'Have you been thinking over my suggestion?' asked Sylvia, when there
had been silence awhile.

'No,' was the murmured reply.

'Something has happened, I think.'

'Yes. I should like to tell you, Sylvia, but'----

'But'----

'I _must_ tell you! I can't keep it in my own mind, and you are the
only one'----

Sylvia was surprised at the agitation which suddenly revealed itself in
her companion's look and voice. She became serious, her eyes
brightening with intellectual curiosity. Feminine expressions of
sympathy were not to be expected from Miss Moorhouse; far more
reassuring to Sidwell was the kind attentiveness with which her friend
bent forward.

'That letter father handed me to-day was from Mr. Peak.'

'You hear from him?'

'This is the third time--since he went away. At our last meeting'--her
voice dropped--'I pledged my faith to him.--Not absolutely. The future
was too uncertain'----

The gleam in Sylvia's eyes grew more vivid. She was profoundly
interested, and did not speak when Sidwell's voice failed.

'You never suspected this?' asked the latter, in a few moments.

'Not exactly that. What I did suspect was that Mr. Peak's departure
resulted from--your rejection of him.'

'There is more to be told,' pursued Sidwell, in tremulous accents. 'You
must know it all--because I need your help. No one here has learnt what
took place between us. Mr. Peak did not go away on that account.
But--you remember being puzzled to explain his orthodoxy in religion?'

She paused. Sylvia gave a nod, signifying much.

'He never believed as he professed,' went on Sidwell, hurriedly. 'You
were justified in doubting him. He concealed the truth--pretended to
champion the old faiths'----

For an instant she broke off, then hastened through a description of
the circumstances which had brought about Peak's discovery. Sylvia
could not restrain a smile, but it was softened by the sincere
kindliness of her feeling.

'And it was after this,' she inquired impartially, 'that the decisive
conversation between you took place?'

'No; just before Buckland's announcement. We met again, after
that.--Does it seem incredible to you that I should have let the second
meeting end as it did?'

'I think I understand. Yes, I know you well enough to follow it. I can
even guess at the defence he was able to urge.'

'You can?' asked Sidwell, eagerly. 'You see a possibility of his
defending himself?'

'I should conjecture that it amounted to the old proverb, "All's fair
in love and war". And, putting aside a few moral prejudices, one can
easily enough absolve him.--The fact is, I had long ago surmised that
his motives in taking to such a career had more reference to this world
than the next. You know, I had several long talks with him; I told you
how he interested me. Now I can piece together my conclusions.'

'Still,' urged Sidwell, 'you must inevitably regard him as ignoble--as
guilty of base deceit. I must hide nothing from you, having told so
much. Have you heard from anyone about his early life?'

'Your mother told me some old stories.'

Sidwell made an impatient gesture. In words of force and ardour, such
as never before had been at her command, she related all she knew of
Godwin's history prior to his settling at Exeter, and depicted the
mood, the impulses, which, by his own confession, had led to that
strange enterprise. Only by long exercise of an impassioned imagination
could she thus thoroughly have identified herself with a life so remote
from her own. Peak's pleading for himself was scarcely more impressive.
In listening, Sylvia understood how completely Sidwell had cast off the
beliefs for which her ordinary conversation seemed still to betray a
tenderness.

'I know,' the speaker concluded, 'that he cannot in that first hour
have come to regard me with a feeling strong enough to determine what
he then undertook. It was not I as an individual, but all of us here,
and the world we represented. Afterwards, he persuaded himself that he
had felt love for me from the beginning. And I, I tried to believe
it--because I wished it true; for his sake, and for my own. However it
was, I could not harden my heart against him. A thousand considerations
forbade me to allow him further hope; but I refused to listen--no, I
_could_ not listen. I said I would remain true to him. He went away to
take up his old pursuits, and if possible to make a position for
himself. It was to be our secret. And in spite of everything. I hoped
for the future.'

Silence followed, and Sidwell seemed to lose herself in distressful
thought.

'And now,' asked her friend, 'what has come to pass?'

'Do you know that Miss Moxey is dead?'

'I haven't heard of it.'

'She is dead, and has left Mr. Peak a fortune.--His letter of today
tells me this. And at the same time he claims my promise.'

Their eyes met. Sylvia still had the air of meditating a most
interesting problem. Impossible to decide from her countenance how she
regarded Sidwell's position.

'But why in the world,' she asked, 'should Marcella Moxey have left her
money to Mr. Peak?'

'They were friends,' was the quick reply. 'She knew all that had
befallen him, and wished to smooth his path.'

Sylvia put several more questions, and to all of them Sidwell replied
with a peculiar decision, as though bent on making it clear that there
was nothing remarkable in this fact of the bequest. The motive which
impelled her was obscure even to her own mind, for ever since receiving
the letter she had suffered harassing doubts where now she affected to
have none. 'She knew, then,' was Sylvia's last inquiry, 'of the
relations between you and Mr. Peak?'

'I am not sure--but I think so. Yes, I think she must have known.'

'From Mr. Peak himself, then?'

Sidwell was agitated.

'Yes--I think so. But what does that matter?'

The other allowed her face to betray perplexity.

'So much for the past,' she said at length. 'And now?'----

'I have not the courage to do what I wish.'

There was a long silence.

'About your wish,' asked Sylvia at length, 'you are not at all
doubtful?'

'Not for one moment.--Whether I err in my judgment of him could be
proved only by time; but I know that if I were free, if I stood
alone'----

She broke off and sighed. 'It would mean, I suppose,' said the other,
'a rupture with your family?'

'Father would not abandon me, but I should darken the close of his
life. Buckland would utterly cast me off; mother would wish to do
so.--You see, I cannot think and act simply as a woman, as a human
being. I am bound to a certain sphere of life. The fact that I have
outgrown it, counts for nothing. I cannot free myself without injury to
people whom I love. To act as I wish would be to outrage every rule and
prejudice of the society to which I belong. You yourself--you know how
you would regard me.'

Sylvia replied deliberately.

'I am seeing you in a new light, Sidwell. It takes a little time to
reconstruct my conception of you.'

'You think worse of me than you did.'

'Neither better nor worse, but differently. There has been too much
reserve between us. After so long a friendship, I ought to have known
you more thoroughly. To tell the truth, I have thought now and then of
you and Mr. Peak; that was inevitable. But I went astray; it seemed to
me the most unlikely thing that you should regard him with more than a
doubtful interest. I knew, of course, that he had made you his ideal,
and I felt sorry for him.'

'I seemed to you unworthy?'----

'Too placid, too calmly prudent.--In plain words, Sidwell, I do think
better of you.'

Sidwell smiled.

'Only to know me henceforth as the woman who did not dare to act upon
her best impulses.'

'As for "best"--I can't say. I don't glorify passion, as you know; and
on the other hand I have little sympathy with the people who are always
crying out for self-sacrifice. I don't know whether it would be "best"
to throw over your family, or to direct yourself solely with regard to
their comfort.'

Sidwell broke in.

'Yes, that is the true phrase--"their comfort". No higher word should
be used. That is the ideal of the life to which I have been brought up.
Comfort, respectability.--And has _he_ no right? If I sacrifice myself
to father and mother, do I not sacrifice _him_ as well? He has
forfeited all claim to consideration--that is what people say. With my
whole soul, I deny it! If he sinned against anyone, it was against me,
and the sin ended as soon as I understood him. That episode in his life
is blotted out; by what law must it condemn to imperfection the whole
of his life and of my own? Yet because people will not, cannot, look at
a thing in a spirit of justice, I must wrong myself and him.'

'Let us think of it more quietly,' said Sylvia, in her clear,
dispassionate tones. 'You speak as though a decision must be taken at
once. Where is the necessity for that? Mr. Peak is now independent.
Suppose a year or two be allowed to pass, may not things look
differently?'

'A year or two!' exclaimed Sidwell, with impatience. 'Nothing will be
changed. What I have to contend against is unchangeable. If I guide
myself by such a hope as that, the only reasonable thing would be for
me to write to Mr. Peak, and ask him to wait until my father and mother
are dead.'

'Very well. On that point we are at rest, then. The step must be taken
at once, or never.'

The wind roared, and for some minutes no other sound was audible. By
this [Updater's note: the word "time" missing?], all the inmates of the
house save the two friends were in bed, and most likely sleeping.

'You must think it strange,' said Sidwell, 'that I have chosen to tell
you all this, just when the confession is most humiliating to me. I
want to feel the humiliation, as one only can when another is witness
of it. I wish to leave myself no excuse for the future.'

'I'm not sure that I quite understand you. You have made up your mind
to break with him?'

'Because I am a coward.'

'If my feeling in any matter were as strong as that, I should allow it
to guide me.'

'Because your will is stronger. You, Sylvia, would never (in my
position) have granted him that second interview. You would have known
that all was at an end, and have acted upon the knowledge. I knew it,
but yielded to temptation--at _his_ expense. I could not let him leave
me, though that would have been kindest. I held him by a promise,
basely conscious that retreat was always open to me. And now I shall
have earned his contempt'----

Her voice failed. Sylvia, affected by the outbreak of emotion in one
whom she had always known so strong in self-command, spoke with a
deeper earnestness.

'Dear, do you wish me to help you against what you call your cowardice?
I cannot take it upon me to encourage you until your own will has
spoken. The decision must come from yourself. Choose what course you
may, I am still your friend. I have no idle prejudices, and no social
bonds. You know how I wish you to come away with me; now I see only
more clearly how needful it is for you to breathe new air. Yes, you
have outgrown these conditions, just as your brothers have, just as
Fanny will--indeed has. Take to-night to think of it. If you can decide
to travel with me for a year, be frank with Mr. Peak, and ask him to
wait so long--till you have made up your mind. He cannot reasonably
find fault with you, for he knows all you have to consider. Won't this
be best?'

Sidwell was long silent.

'I will go with you,' she said at last, in a low voice. 'I will ask him
to grant me perfect liberty for a year.'

When she came down next morning it was Sidwell's intention to seek a
private interview with her father, and make known her resolve to go
abroad with Sylvia; but Mr. Warricombe anticipated her.

'Will you come to the library after breakfast, Sidwell?' he said, on
meeting her in the hall.

She interpreted his tone, and her heart misgave her. An hour later she
obeyed the summons. Martin greeted her with a smile, but hardly tried
to appear at ease.

'I am obliged to speak to you,' were his first words. 'The letter you
had yesterday was from Mr. Peak?'

'Yes, father.'

'Is he'--Mr. Warricombe hesitated--'in these parts again?'

'No; in Lancashire.'

'Sidwell, I claim no right whatever to control your correspondence; but
it was a shock to me to find that you are in communication with him.'

'He wrote,' Sidwell replied with difficulty, 'to let me know of a
change that has come upon his prospects. By the death of a friend, he
is made independent.'

'For his own sake, I am glad to hear that. But how could it concern
_you_, dear?'

She struggled to command herself.

'It was at my invitation that he wrote, father.'

Martin's face expressed grave concern.

'Sidwell! Is this right?'

She was very pale, and kept her eyes unmovingly directed just aside
from her father.

'What can it mean?' Mr. Warricombe pursued, with sad remonstrance.
'Will you not take me into your confidence, Sidwell?'

'I can't speak of it,' she replied, with sudden determination. 'Least
of all with you, father.'

'Least of all?--I thought we were very near to each other.'

'For that very reason, I can't speak to you of this. I must be left
free! I am going away with Sylvia, for a year, and for so long I _must_
be absolutely independent. Father, I entreat you not to'----

A sob checked her. She turned away, and fought against the hysterical
tendency; but it was too strong to be controlled. Her father
approached, beseeching her to be more like herself. He held her in his
arms, until tears had their free course, and a measure of calmness
returned.

'I can't speak to you about it,' she repeated, her face hidden from
him. 'I must write you a long letter, when I have gone. You shall know
everything in that way.'

'But, my dearest, I can't let you leave us under these circumstances.
This is a terrible trial to me. You cannot possibly go until we
understand each other!'

'Then I will write to you here--to-day or to-morrow.'

With this promise Martin was obliged to be contented, Sidwell left him,
and was not seen, except by Sylvia, during the whole day.

Nor did she appear at breakfast on the morning that followed. But when
this meal was over, Sylvia received a message, summoning her to the
retreat on the top of the house. Here Sidwell sat in the light and
warmth, a glass door wide open to the west, the rays of a brilliant sun
softened by curtains which fluttered lightly in the breeze from the sea.

'Will you read this?' she said, holding out a sheet of notepaper on
which were a few lines in her own handwriting.

It was a letter, beginning--'I cannot.'

Sylvia perused it carefully, and stood in thought.

'After all?' were the words with which she broke silence. They were
neither reproachful nor regretful, but expressed grave interest.

'In the night,' said Sidwell, 'I wrote to father, but I shall not give
him the letter. Before it was finished, I knew that I must write
_this_. There's no more to be said, dear. You will go abroad without
me--at all events for the present.'

'If that is your resolve,' answered the other, quietly, 'I shall keep
my word, and only do what I can to aid it.' She sat down shielding her
eyes from the sunlight with a Japanese fan. 'After all, Sidwell,
there's much to be said for a purpose formed on such a morning as this;
one can't help distrusting the midnight.'

Sidwell was lying back in a low chair, her eyes turned to the woody
hills on the far side of the Exe.

'There's one thing I should like to say,' her friend pursued. 'It
struck me as curious that you were not at all affected, by what to me
would have been the one insuperable difficulty.'

'I know what you mean--the legacy.'

'Yes. It still seems to you of no significance?'

'Of very little,' Sidwell answered wearily, letting her eyelids droop.

'Then we won't talk about it. From the higher point of view, I believe
you are right; but--still let it rest.'

In the afternoon, Sidwell penned the following lines which she enclosed
in an envelope and placed on the study table, when her father was
absent.

'The long letter which I promised you, dear father, is needless. I have
to-day sent Mr. Peak a reply which closes our correspondence. I am sure
he will not write again; if he were to do so, I should not answer.

'I have given up my intention of going away with Sylvia. Later,
perhaps, I shall wish to join her somewhere on the Continent, but by
that time you will be in no concern about me.'

To this Mr. Warricombe replied only with the joyous smile which greeted
his daughter at their next meeting. Mrs. Warricombe remained in
ignorance of the ominous shadow which had passed over her house. At
present, she was greatly interested in the coming marriage of the Rev.
Bruno Chilvers, whom she tried _not_ to forgive for having disappointed
her secret hope.

Martin had finally driven into the background those uneasy
questionings, which at one time it seemed likely that Godwin Peak would
rather accentuate than silence. With Sidwell, he could never again
touch on such topics. If he were still conscious of a postponed debate,
the adjournment was _sine die_. Martin rested in the faith that,
without effort of his own, the mysteries of life and time would ere
long be revealed to him.