CHAPTER IV


Sidwell had fallen into conversation with Mr. Moorhouse. Miss
Moorhouse, Mrs. Warricombe, and Louis were grouped in animated talk.
Observing that Fanny threw glances towards him from a lonely corner,
Peak went over to her, and was pleased with the smile he met. Fanny had
watched eyes, much brighter than Sidwell's; her youthful vivacity
blended with an odd little fashion of schoolgirl pedantry in a very
piquant way. Godwin's attempts at conversation with her were rather
awkward; he found it difficult to strike the suitable note, something
not too formal yet not deficient in respect.

'Do you think,' he asked presently, 'that I should disturb your father
if I went to him?'

'Oh, not at all! I often go and sit in the study at this time.'

'Will you show me the way?'

Fanny at once rose, and together they crossed the hall, passed through
a sort of anteroom connecting with a fernery, and came to the study
door. A tap was answered by cheerful summons, and Fanny looked in.

'Well, my ladybird? Ah, you are bringing Mr. Peak; come in, come in!'

It was a large and beautiful room, its wide windows, in a cushioned
recess, looking upon the lawn where the yew tree cast solemn shade. One
wall presented an unbroken array of volumes, their livery sober but
handsome; detached bookcases occupied other portions of the irregular
perimeter. Cabinets, closed and open, were arranged with due regard to
convenience. Above the mantelpiece hung a few small photographs, but
the wall-space at disposal was chiefly occupied with objects which
illustrated Mr. Warricombe's scientific tastes. On a stand in the light
of the window gleamed two elaborate microscopes, provocative of
enthusiasm in a mind such as Godwin's.

In a few minutes, Fanny silently retired. Her father, by no means
forward to speak of himself and his pursuits, was led in that direction
by Peak's expressions of interest, and the two were soon busied with
matters which had a charm for both. A collection of elvans formed the
starting-point, and when they had entered upon the wide field of
palaeontology it was natural for Mr. Warricombe to invite his guest's
attention to the species of _homalonotus_ which he had had the
happiness of identifying some ten years ago--a discovery now recognised
and chronicled. Though his sympathy was genuine enough, Godwin
struggled against an uneasy sense of manifesting excessive
appreciation. Never oblivious of himself, he could not utter the
simplest phrase of admiration without criticising its justice, its
tone. And at present it behoved him to bear in mind that he was
conversing with no half-bred sciolist. Mr Warricombe obviously had his
share of human weakness, but he was at once a gentleman and a student
of well-stored mind; insincerity must be very careful if it would not
jar upon his refined ear. So Godwin often checked himself in the
utterance of what might sound too much like flattery. A young man
talking with one much older, a poor man in dialogue with a wealthy,
must under any circumstances guard his speech; for one of Godwin's
aggressive idiosyncrasy the task of discretion had peculiar
difficulties, and the attitude he had assumed at luncheon still further
complicated the operations of his mind. Only at moments could he speak
in his true voice, and silence meant for the most part a studious
repression of much he would naturally have uttered.

Resurgent envy gave him no little trouble. On entering the room, he
could not but exclaim to himself, 'How easy for a man to do notable
work amid such surroundings! If I were but thus equipped for
investigation!' And as often as his eyes left a particular object to
make a general survey, the same thought burned in him. He feared lest
it should be legible on his countenance.

Taking a pamphlet from the table, Mr. Warricombe, with a humorous
twinkle in his eyes, inquired whether Peak read German; the answer
being affirmative:

'Naturally,' he rejoined, 'you could hardly have neglected so important
a language. I, unfortunately, didn't learn it in my youth, and I have
never had perseverance enough to struggle with it since. Something led
me to take down this brochure the other day--an old attempt of mine to
write about the weathering of rocks. It was printed in '76, and no
sooner had it seen the light than friends of mine wanted to know what I
meant by appropriating, without acknowledgement, certain facts quite
recently pointed out by Professor Pfaff of Erlangen! Unhappily,
Professor Pfaff's results were quite unknown to me, and I had to get
them translated. The coincidences, sure enough, were very noticeable.
Just before you came in, I was reviving that old discomfiture.'

Peak, in glancing over the pages, murmured with a smile:

'_Pereant qui ante nos nostra dixerunt_!'

'Even so!' exclaimed Mr. Warricombe, laughing with a subdued heartiness
which was one of his pleasant characteristics. And, after a pause, he
inquired, 'Do you find any time to keep up your classics?'

'By fits and starts. Sometimes I return to them for a month or two.'

'Why, it's pretty much the same with me. Here on my table, for
instance, lies Tacitus. I found it mentioned not long ago that the
first sentence of the _Annals_ is a hexameter--did you know it?--and
when I had once got hold of the book I thought it a shabby thing to
return it to the dust of its shelf without reading at least a few
pages. So I have gone on from day to day, with no little enjoyment.
Buckland, as you probably know, regards these old fellows with scorn.'

'We always differed about that.'

'I can't quite decide whether he is still sincere in all he says about
them. Time, I suspect, is mellowing his judgment.'

They moved to the shelves where Greek and Latin books stood in serried
order, and only the warning dinner-bell put an end to their sympathetic
discussion of the place such authors should hold in modern educational
systems.

'Have they shown you your room?' Mr. Warricombe asked.

But, as he spoke, the face of his eldest son appeared at the door.

'Your traps have safely arrived, Peak.'

The bedroom to which Godwin was conducted had a delicious fragrance, of
source indeterminable. When he had closed the door, he stood for a few
moments looking about him; it was his first experience of the upper
chambers of houses such as this. Merely to step upon the carpet
fluttered his senses: merely to breathe the air was a purification.
Luxury of the rational kind, dictated by regard for health of body and
soul, appeared in every detail. On the walls were water-colours,
scenery of Devon and Cornwall; a hanging book-case held about a score
of volumes poets, essayists, novelists. Elsewhere, not too prominent,
lay a Bible and a Prayer-book.

He dressed, as never before, with leisurely enjoyment of the process.
When the mirror declared him ready, his eyes returned frequently to an
inspection of the figure he presented, and it seemed to him that he was
not unworthy to take his place at the dinner-table. As for his visage,
might he not console himself with the assurance that it was of no
common stamp? 'If I met that man in a room, I should be curious about
him; I should see at once that he didn't belong to the vulgar; I should
desire to hear him speak.' And the Warricombes were not lacking in
discernment. He would compare more than favourably with Mr. Moorhouse,
whose aspect, bright and agreeable enough, made no promise of
originality.--It must be time to go down. He left the room with an air
of grave self-confidence.

At dinner he was careful to attempt no repetition of the display which
had done very well at luncheon; it must not be thought that he had the
habit of talking for effect. Mrs. Warricombe, unless he mistook, had
begun to view him more favourably; her remarks made less distinction
between him and the other guests. But he could not like his hostess; he
thought her unworthy to be the mother of Sidwell and Fanny, of Buckland
and Louis; there was a marked strain of the commonplace in her. The
girls, costumed for the evening, affected him with a return of the awe
he had all but overcome. Sidwell was exquisite in dark colours, her
sister in white. Miss Moorhouse (addressed by her friends as 'Sylvia')
looked older than in the day-time, and had lost something of her
animation; possibly the country routine had begun to weary her a little.

Peak was at a vast distance from the hour which saw him alight at
Exeter and begin his ramble about the city. He no longer felt himself
alone in the world; impossible to revive the mood in which he
deliberately planned to consume his economies in a year or two of
desert wandering; far other were the anticipations which warmed his
mind when the after-dinner repose attuned him to unwonted hopefulness.
This family were henceforth his friends, and it depended only upon
himself to make the connection lasting, with all manner of benefits
easily imagined. Established in the country, the Warricombes stood to
him in quite a different relation from any that could have arisen had
he met with them in London. There he would have been nothing more than
a casual dinner-guest, welcomed for the hour and all but forgotten when
he had said good-night. For years he had understood that London offered
him no prospect of social advancement. But a night passed under this
roof practically raised him to a level whence he surveyed a rich field
of possible conquest. With the genial geologist he felt himself on
excellent terms, and much of this was ascribable to a singular chance
which had masked his real being, and represented him, with scarce an
effort of his own, in a light peculiarly attractive to Mr. Warricombe.
He was now playing the conscious hypocrite; not a pleasant thing to
face and accept, but the fault was not his--fate had brought it about.
At all events, he aimed at no vulgar profit; his one desire was for
human fellowship; he sought nothing but that solace which every code of
morals has deemed legitimate. Let the society which compelled to such
an expedient bear the burden of its shame.

That must indeed have been a circle of great intellects amid which
Godwin Peak felt himself subordinate. He had never known that
impression, and in the Warricombe family was no one whom he could
regard even as his equal. Buckland, doubtless, had some knowledge of
the world, and could boast of a free mind; but he lacked subtlety: a
psychological problem would easily puzzle him. Mr. Warricombe's
attainments were respectable, but what could be said of a man who had
devoted his life to geology, and still (in the year 1884) remained an
orthodox member of the Church of England? Godwin, as he sat in the
drawing-room and enjoyed its atmosphere of refinement, sincerely held
himself of far more account as an intellectual being than all the
persons about him.

But if his brain must dwell in solitude his heart might compass worthy
alliances--the thing most needful to humanity. One may find the
associates of his intellect in libraries--the friend of one's emotions
must walk in flesh and blood. Earwaker, Moxey--these were in many
respects admirable fellows, and he had no little love for them, but the
world they represented was womanless, and so of flagrant imperfection.
Of Marcella Moxey he could not think emotionally; indeed she emphasised
by her personality the lack which caused his suffering. Sidwell
Warricombe suggested, more completely than any woman he had yet
observed, that companionship without which life must to the end taste
bitter. His interest in her was not strictly personal; she moved and
spoke before him as a typical woman, not as the daughter of Martin
Warricombe and the sister of Buckland. Here at last opened to his view
that sphere of female society which he had known as remotely existing,
the desperate aim of ambition.

Conventional women--but was not the phrase tautological? In the few
females who have liberated their souls, was not much of the woman
inevitably sacrificed, and would it not be so for long years to come?
On the other hand, such a one as Sidwell might be held a perfect
creature, perfect in relation to a certain stage of human development.
Look at her, as she sat conversing with Moorhouse, soft candle-light
upon her face; compare her on the one hand with an average emancipated
girl, on the other with a daughter of the people. How unsatisfying was
the former; the latter, how repulsive! Here one had the exquisite mean,
the lady as England has perfected her towards the close of this
nineteenth century. A being of marvellous delicacy, of purest
instincts, of unsurpassable sweetness. Who could not detail her
limitations, obvious and, in certain moods, irritating enough? These
were nothing to the point, unless one would roam the world a hungry
idealist; and Godwin was weary of the famined pilgrimage.

The murmur of amiable voices softened him to the reception of all that
was good in his present surroundings, and justified in the light of
sentiment his own dishonour. This English home, was it not surely the
best result of civilisation in an age devoted to material progress?
Here was peace, here was scope for the kindliest emotions. Upon
him--the born rebel, the scorner of average mankind, the consummate
egoist--this atmosphere exercised an influence more tranquillising,
more beneficent, than even the mood of disinterested study. In the
world to which sincerity would condemn him, only the worst elements of
his character found nourishment and range; here he was humanised, made
receptive of all gentle sympathies. Heroism might point him to an
unending struggle with adverse conditions, but how was heroism possible
without faith? Absolute faith he had none; he was essentially a
negativist, guided by the mere relations of phenomena. Nothing easier
than to contemn the mode of life represented by this wealthy middle
class; but compare it with other existences conceivable by a thinking
man, and it was emphatically good. It aimed at placidity, at
benevolence, at supreme cleanliness,--things which more than
compensated for the absence of higher spirituality. We can be but what
we are; these people accepted themselves, and in so doing became
estimable mortals. No imbecile pretensions exposed them to the rebuke
of a social satirist; no vulgarity tainted their familiar intercourse.
Their allegiance to a worn-out creed was felt as an added grace; thus
only could their souls aspire, and the imperfect poetry of their
natures be developed.

He took an opportunity of seating himself by Mrs. Warricombe, with whom
as yet he had held no continuous dialogue.

'Has there been anything of interest at the London theatres lately?'
she asked.

'I know so little of them,' Godwin replied, truthfully. 'It must be
several years since I saw a play.'

'Then in that respect you have hardly become a Londoner.'

'Nor in any other, I believe,' said Peak, with a smile. 'I have lived
there ten years, but am far from regarding London as my home. I hope a
few months more will release me from it altogether.'

'Indeed!--Perhaps you think of leaving England?'

'I should be very sorry to do that--for any length of time. My wish is
to settle somewhere in the country, and spend a year or two in quiet
study.'

Mrs. Warricombe looked amiable surprise, but corrected herself to
approving interest.

'I have heard some of our friends say that their minds get unstrung, if
they are long away from town, but I should have thought that country
quietness would be much better than London noise. My husband certainly
finds it so.'

'People are very differently constituted,' said Godwin. 'And then it
depends much on the nature of one's work.'

Uttering these commonplaces with an air of reflection, he observed that
they did not cost him the self-contempt which was wont to be his
penalty for concession to the terms of polite gossip; rather, his mind
accepted with gratitude this rare repose. He tasted something of the
tranquil self-content which makes life so enjoyable when one has never
seen a necessity for shaping original remarks. No one in this room
would despise him for a platitude, were it but recommended with a
pleasant smile. With the Moxeys, with Earwaker, he durst not thus have
spoken.

When the hour of separation was at hand, Buckland invited his guest to
retire with him to a part of the house where they could smoke and chat
comfortably.

'Moorhouse and Louis are fagged after their twenty mile stretch this
morning; I have caught both of them nodding during the last few
minutes. We can send them to bed without apology.'

He led the way upstairs to a region of lumber-rooms, whence a narrow
flight of steps brought them into a glass-house, octangular and with
pointed tops, out upon the roof. This, he explained, had been built
some twenty years ago, at a time when Mr. Warricombe amused himself
with photography. A few indications of its original purposes were still
noticeable; an easel and a box of oil-colours showed that
someone--doubtless of the younger generation--had used it as a
painting-room; a settee and deep cane chairs made it an inviting lounge
on a warm evening like the present, when, by throwing open a hinged
wall, one looked forth into the deep sky and tasted the air from the
sea.

'Sidwell used to paint a little,' said Buckland, as his companion bent
to examine a small canvas on which a landscape was roughed in. It lay
on a side table, and was half concealed by an ordnance map, left
unfolded. 'For the last year or two I think she has given it up. I'm
afraid we are not strong in matters of art. Neither of the girls can
play very well, though of course they both tinkle for their own
amusement. Maurice--the poor lad who was killed--gave a good deal of
artistic promise; father keeps some little water-colours of his, which
men in that line have praised--perhaps sincerely.'

'I remember you used to speak slightingly of art,' said Godwin, as he
took an offered cigar.

'Did I? And of a good many other things, I daresay. It was my habit at
one time, I believe, to grow heated in scorn of Euclid's definitions.
What an interesting book Euclid is! Half a year ago, I was led by a
talk with Moorhouse to go through some of the old "props", and you
can't imagine how they delighted me. Moorhouse was so obliging as to
tell me that I had an eminently deductive mind.'

He laughed, but not without betraying some pleasure in the remark.

'Surprising,' he went on, 'how very little such a mind as Moorhouse's
suggests itself in common conversation. He is really profound in
mathematics, a man of original powers, but I never heard him make a
remark of the slightest value on any other subject. Now his sister--she
has studied nothing in particular, yet she can't express an opinion
that doesn't bear the stamp of originality.'

Godwin was contented to muse, his eyes fixed on a brilliant star in the
western heaven.

'There's only one inconsistency in her that annoys and puzzles me,'
Buckland pursued, speaking with the cigar in his mouth. 'In religion,
she seems to be orthodox. True, we have never spoken on the subject,
but--well, she goes to church, and carries prayer-books. I don't know
how to explain it. Hypocrisy is the last thing one could suspect her
of. I'm sure she hates it in every form. And such a clear brain!--I
can't understand it.'

The listener was still star-gazing. He had allowed his cigar, after the
first few puffs, to smoulder untasted; his lips were drawn into an
expression very unlike the laxity appropriate to pleasurable smoking.
When the murmur of the pines had for a moment been audible, he said,
with a forced smile:

'I notice you take for granted that a clear brain and religious
orthodoxy are incompatible.'

The other gave him a keen look.

'Hardly,' was Buckland's reply, spoken with less ingenuousness of tone
than usual. 'I say that Miss Moorhouse has undeniably a strong mind,
and that it is impossible to suspect her of the slightest hypocrisy.'

'Whence the puzzle that keeps you occupied,' rejoined Peak, in a voice
that sounded like assumption of superiority, though the accent had an
agreeable softness.

Warricombe moved as if impatiently, struck a match to rekindle his
weed, blew tumultuous clouds, and finally put a blunt question:

'What do you think about it yourself?'

'From my point of view, there is no puzzle at all,' Godwin replied, in
a very clear voice, smiling as he met the other's look.

'How am I to understand that?' asked Buckland, good-naturedly, though
with a knitting of his brows.

'Not as a doubt of Miss Moorhouse's sincerity. I can't see that a
belief in the Christian religion is excluded by any degree of
intellectual clearness.'

'No--your views have changed, Peak?'

'On many subjects, this among them.'

'I see.'

The words fell as if involuntarily from Warricombe's lips. He gazed at
the floor awhile, then, suddenly looking up, exclaimed:

'It would be civil to accept this without surprise, but it is too much
for me. How has it come about?'

'That would take me a long time to explain.'

'Then,' pursued his companion, watching him closely, 'you were quite in
sympathy with that exposition you gave at lunch today?'

'Quite. I hope there was nothing in my way of speaking that made you
think otherwise?'

'Nothing at all. I couldn't help wondering what it meant. You seemed
perfectly in earnest, yet such talk had the oddest sound on your
lips--to me, I mean. Of course I thought of you as I used to know you.'

'Naturally.' Peak was now in an attitude of repose, his legs crossed,
thumb and forefinger stroking his chin. 'I couldn't very well turn
aside to comment on my own mental history.'

Here again was the note of something like genial condescension.
Buckland seemed sensible of it, and slightly raised his eyebrows.

'I am to understand that you have become strictly orthodox in matters
of religious faith?'

'The proof is,' replied Godwin, 'that I hope before long to take
Orders.'

Again there was silence, and again the sea-breath made its whispering
in the pines. Warricombe, with a sudden gesture, pointed towards the
sky.

'A shooting star--one of the brightest I ever saw!'

'I missed it,' said Peak, just glancing in that direction.

The interruption enabled Buckland to move his chair; in this new
position he was somewhat further from Peak, and had a better view of
his face.

'I should never have imagined you a clergyman,' he said, thoughtfully,
'but I can see that your mind has been developing powers in that
direction.--Well, so be it! I can only hope you have found your true
work in life.'

'But you doubt it?'

'I can't say that I doubt it, as I can't understand you. To be sure, we
have been parted for many years. In some respects I must seem much
changed'--

'Greatly changed,' Godwin put in, promptly.

'Yes,' pursued the other, correctively, 'but not in a way that would
seem incredible to anyone whatever. I am conscious of growth in
tolerance, but my attitude in essentials is unchanged. Thinking of
you--as I have often enough done--I always kept the impression you made
on me when we were both lads; you seemed most distinctly a modern
mind--one of the most modern that ever came under my notice. Now, I
don't find it impossible to understand my father, when he reconciles
science with religion; he was born sixty years ago. But Godwin Peak as
a--a--'

'Parson,' supplied Peak, drily.

'Yes, as a parson--I shall have to meditate much before I grasp the
notion.'

'Perhaps you have dropped your philosophical studies?' said Godwin,
with a smile of courteous interest.

'I don't know. Metaphysics have no great interest for me, but I
philosophise in a way. I thought myself a student of human nature, at
all events.'

'But you haven't kept up with philosophical speculation on the points
involved in orthodox religion?'

'I confess my ignorance of everything of the kind--unless you include
Bishop Blougram among the philosophers?'

Godwin bore the gaze which accompanied this significant inquiry. For a
moment he smiled, but there followed an expression of gravity touched
with pain.

'I hadn't thought of broaching this matter,' he said, with slow
utterance, but still in a tone of perfect friendliness. 'Let us put it
aside.'

Warricombe seemed to make an effort, and his next words had the accent
of well-bred consideration which distinguished his ordinary talk.

'Pray forgive my bad joke. I merely meant that I have no right whatever
to argue with anyone who has given serious attention to such things.
They are altogether beyond my sphere. I was born an agnostic, and no
subtlety of demonstration could incline me for a moment to theological
views; my intellect refuses to admit a single preliminary of such
arguments. You astonish me, and that's all I am justified in saying.'

'My dear Warricombe, you are justified in saying whatever your mind
suggests. That is one of the principles which I hold unaltered--let me
be quite frank with you. I should never have decided upon such a step
as this, but for the fact that I have managed to put by a small sum of
money which will make me independent for two or three years. Till quite
lately I hadn't a thought of using my freedom in this way; it was clear
to me that I must throw over the old drudgery at Rotherhithe, but this
resolve which astonishes you had not yet ripened--I saw it only as one
of the possibilities of my life. Well, now, it's only too true that
there's something of speculation in my purpose; I look to the Church,
not only as a congenial sphere of activity, but as a means of
subsistence. In a man of no fortune this is inevitable; I hope there is
nothing to be ashamed of. Even if the conditions of the case allowed
it, I shouldn't present myself for ordination forthwith; I must study
and prepare myself in quietness. How the practical details will be
arranged, I can't say; I have no family influence, and I must hope to
make friends who will open a way for me. I have always lived apart from
society; but that isn't natural to me, and it becomes more distasteful
the older I grow. The probability is that I shall settle somewhere in
the country, where I can live decently on a small income. After all,
it's better I should have let you know this at once. I only realised a
few minutes ago that to be silent about my projects was in a way to be
guilty of false pretences.'

The adroitness of this last remark, which directed itself, with such
show of candour, against a suspicion precisely the opposite of that
likely to be entertained by the listener, succeeded in disarming
Warricombe; he looked up with a smile of reassurance, and spoke
encouragingly.

'About the practical details I don't think you need have any anxiety.
It isn't every day that the Church of England gets such a recruit. Let
me suggest that you have a talk with my father.'

Peak reflected on the proposal, and replied to it with grave
thoughtfulness:

'That's very kind of you, but I should have a difficulty in asking Mr.
Warricombe's advice. I'm afraid I must go on in my own way for a time.
It will be a few months, I daresay, before I can release myself from my
engagements in London.'

'But I am to understand that your mind is really made up?'

'Oh, quite!'

'Well, no doubt we shall have opportunities of talking. We must meet in
town, if possible. You have excited my curiosity, and I can't help
hoping you'll let me see a little further into your mind some day. When
I first got hold of Newman's _Apologia_, I began to read it with the
utmost eagerness, flattering myself that now at length I should
understand how a man of brains could travel such a road. I was horribly
disappointed, and not a little enraged, when I found that he began by
assuming the very beliefs I thought he was going to justify. In you I
shall hope for more logic.'

'Newman is incapable of understanding such an objection,' said Peak,
with a look of amusement.

'But you are not.'

The dialogue grew chatty. When they exchanged good-night, Peak fancied
that the pressure of Buckland's hand was less fervent than at their
meeting, but his manner no longer seemed to indicate distrust. Probably
the agnostic's mood was one of half-tolerant disdain.

Godwin turned the key in his bedroom door, and strayed aimlessly about.
He was fatigued, but the white, fragrant bed did not yet invite him; a
turbulence in his brain gave warning that it would be long before he
slept. He wound up his watch; the hands pointed to twelve. Chancing to
come before the mirror, he saw that he was unusually pale, and that his
eyes had a swollen look.

The profound stillness was oppressive to him; he started nervously at
an undefined object in a dim corner, and went nearer to examine it; he
was irritable, vaguely discontented, and had even a moment of nausea,
perhaps the result of tobacco stronger than he was accustomed to smoke.
After leaning for five minutes at the open window, he felt a soothing
effect from the air, and could think consecutively of the day's events.
What had happened seemed to him incredible; it was as though he revived
a mad dream, of ludicrous coherence. Since his display of rhetoric at
luncheon all was downright somnambulism. What fatal power had subdued
him? What extraordinary influence had guided his tongue, constrained
his features? His conscious self had had no part in all this comedy;
now for the first time was he taking count of the character he had
played.

Had he been told this morning that--Why, what monstrous folly was all
this? Into what unspeakable baseness had he fallen? Happily, he had but
to take leave of the Warricombe household, and rush into some region
where he was unknown. Years hence, he would relate the story to
Earwaker.

For a long time he suffered the torments of this awakening. Shame
buffeted him on the right cheek and the left; he looked about like one
who slinks from merited chastisement. Oh, thrice ignoble varlet! To
pose with unctuous hypocrisy before people who had welcomed him under
their roof, unquestioned, with all the grace and kindliness of English
hospitality! To lie shamelessly in the face of his old fellow-student,
who had been so genuinely glad to meet him again!

Yet such possibility had not been unforeseen. At the times of his
profound gloom, when solitude and desire crushed his spirit, he had
wished that fate would afford him such an opportunity of knavish
success. His imagination had played with the idea that a man like
himself might well be driven to this expedient, and might even use it
with life-long result. Of a certainty, the Church numbered such men
among her priests,--not mere lukewarm sceptics who made religion a
source of income, nor yet those who had honestly entered the portal and
by necessity were held from withdrawing, though their convictions had
changed; but deliberate schemers from the first, ambitious but hungry
natures, keen-sighted, unscrupulous. And they were at no loss to defend
themselves against the attack of conscience. Life is a terrific
struggle for all who begin it with no endowments save their brains. A
hypocrite was not necessarily a harm-doer; easy to picture the
unbelieving priest whose influence was vastly for good, in word and
deed.

But he, he who had ever prided himself on his truth-fronting intellect,
and had freely uttered his scorn of the credulous mob! He who was his
own criterion of moral right and wrong! No wonder he felt like a
whipped cur. It was the ancestral vice in his blood, brought out by
over-tempting circumstance. The long line of base-born predecessors,
the grovelling hinds and mechanics of his genealogy, were responsible
for this. Oh for a name wherewith honour was hereditary!

His eyes were blinded by a rush of hot tears. Down, down--into the
depths of uttermost despondency, of self-pity and self-contempt! Had it
been practicable, he would have fled from the house, leaving its
occupants to think of him as they would; even as, ten years ago, he had
fled from the shame impending over him at Kingsmill. A cowardly
instinct, this; having once acted upon it gave to his whole life a
taint of craven meanness. Mere bluster, all his talk of mental dignity
and uncompromising scorn of superstitions. A weak and idle man, whose
best years were already wasted!

He gazed deliberately at himself in the glass, at his red eyelids and
unsightly lips. Darkness was best; perhaps he might forget his shame
for an hour or two, ere the dawn renewed it. He threw off his garments
heedlessly, extinguished the lamp, and crept into the ready
hiding-place.