CHAPTER V


In the course of the afternoon, Godwin sat down to pen the rough draft
of a letter to Lady Whitelaw. When the first difficulties were
surmounted, he wrote rapidly, and at considerable length. It was not
easy, at his time of life, to compress into the limits of an ordinary
epistle all he wished to say to the widow of his benefactor. His
purpose was, with all possible respect yet as firmly as might be, to
inform Lady Whitelaw that he could not spend the last of his proposed
three years at the College in Kingsmill, and furthermore to request of
her that she would permit his using the promised sum of money as a
student at the Royal School of Mines. This had to be done without
confession of the reasons for his change of plan; he could not even
hint at them. Yet cause must be assigned, and the best form of words he
could excogitate ran thus: 'Family circumstances render it
desirable--almost necessary--that I should spend the next twelve months
in London. In spite of sincere reluctance to leave Whitelaw College, I
am compelled to take this step.' The lady must interpret that as best
she might. Very hard indeed was the task of begging a continuance of
her bounty under these changed conditions. Could he but have resigned
the money, all had been well; his tone might then have been dignified
without effort. But such disinterestedness he could not afford. His
mother might grant him money enough barely to live upon until he
discovered means of support--for his education she was unable to pay.
After more than an hour's work he had moderately satisfied himself;
indeed, several portions of the letter struck him as well composed, and
he felt that they must heighten the reader's interest in him. With an
author's pleasure (though at the same time with much uneasiness) he
perused the appeal again and again.

Late in the evening, when he was alone with his mother, he told her
what he had done, and read the letter for her opinion. Mrs. Peak was
gravely troubled.

'Lady Whitelaw will ask her sisters for an explanation,' she said.

'I have thought of that,' Godwin replied, with the confident, cheerful
air he had assumed from the first. 'If the Miss Lumbs go to aunt, she
must be prepared to put them off in some way. But look here, mother,
when uncle has opened his shop, it's pretty certain that some one or
other will hit on the true explanation of my disappearance. Let them.
Then Lady Whitelaw will understand and forgive me.'

After much musing, the mother ventured a timid question, the result of
her anxieties rather than of her judgment on the point at issue.

'Godwin, dear, are you quite sure that his shop would make so much
difference?'

The young man gave a passionate start.

'What! To have the fellows going there to eat, and hearing his talk,
and--? Not for a day could I bear it! Not for an hour!'

He was red with anticipated shame, and his voice shook with indignation
at the suggested martyrdom. Mrs. Peak dried a tear.

'You would be so alone in London, Godwin.'

'Not a bit of it. Young Mr. Moxey will be a useful friend, I am
convinced he will. To tell you the whole truth, I aim at getting a
place at the works in Rotherhithe, where he no doubt has influence. You
see, mother, I might manage it even before the end of the year. Our Mr.
Moxey will be disposed to help me with his recommendation.'

'But, my dear, wouldn't it come to the same thing, then, if you went
back to Mr. Moxey's?'

He made a gesture of impatience.

'No, no, no! I couldn't live at Twybridge. I have my way to make,
mother, and the place for that is London. You know I am ambitious.
Trust me for a year or two, and see the result. I depend upon your help
in this whole affair. Don't refuse it me. I have done with Whitelaw,
and I have done with Twybridge: now comes London. You can't regard me
as a boy, you know.'

'No--but'--

'But me no buts!' he cried, laughing excitedly. 'The thing is settled.
As soon as possible in the morning I post this letter. I feel it will
be successful. See aunt to-morrow, and get her support. Mind that
Charlotte and Oliver don't talk to people. If you all use discretion,
there's no need for any curiosity to be excited.'

When Godwin had taken a resolve, there was no domestic influence strong
enough to prevent his acting upon it. Mrs. Peak's ignorance of the
world, her mild passivity, and the faith she had in her son's
intellectual resources, made her useless as a counsellor, and from no
one else--now that Mr. Gunnery was dead--would the young man have
dreamt of seeking guidance. Whatever Lady Whitelaw's reply, he had made
up his mind to go to London. Should his subsidy be refused, then he
would live on what his mother could allow him until--probably with the
aid of Christian Moxey--he might obtain a salaried position. The letter
was despatched, and with feverish impatience he awaited a reply.

Nine days passed, and he heard nothing. Half that delay sufficed to
bring out all the self-tormenting capacities of a nature such as his.
To his mother's conjectural explanations he could lend no ear.
Doubtless Lady Whitelaw (against whom, for subtle reasons, he was
already prejudiced) had taken offence; either she would not reply at
all, or presently there would come a few lines of polite displeasure,
intimating her disinclination to aid his project. He silently raged
against 'the woman'. Her neglect was insolence. Had she not delicacy
enough to divine the anxiety natural to one in his dependent position?
Did she take him for an every-day writer of mendicant appeals? His
pride fed upon the outrage and became fierce.

Then arrived a small glossy envelope, containing a tiny sheet of very
thick note-paper, whereon it was written that Lady Whitelaw regretted
her tardiness in replying to him (caused by her absence from home), and
hoped he would be able to call upon her, at ten o'clock next morning,
at the house of her sisters, the Misses Lumb, where she was stopping
for a day--she remained his sincerely.

Having duly contorted this note into all manner of painful meanings,
Godwin occupied an hour in making himself presentable (scornful that he
should deem such trouble necessary), and with furiously beating heart
set out to walk through Twybridge. Arrived at the house, he was led by
a servant into the front room on the ground floor, where Lady Whitelaw,
alone, sat reading a newspaper. Her features were of a very common
order, and nothing distinguished her from middle-aged women of average
refinement; she had chubby hands, rather broad shoulders, and no
visible waist. The scrutiny she bestowed upon her visitor was close. To
Godwin's feelings it too much resembled that with which she would have
received an applicant for the post of footman. Yet her smile was
friendly enough, and no lack of civility appeared in the repetition of
her excuses for having replied so late.

'Let us talk about this,' she began, when Godwin was uneasily seated.
(She spoke with an excess of precision, as though it had at one time
been needful for her to premeditate polished phrases.) 'I am very sorry
you should have to think of quitting the College; very sorry indeed.
You are one of the students who do honour to the institution.'

This was pleasant, and Godwin felt a regret of the constraint that was
upon him. In his endeavour not to display a purring smile, he looked
grim, as if the compliment were beneath his notice.

'Pray don't think,' she pursued, 'that I wish you to speak more fully
about the private circumstances you refer to in your letter. But do let
me ask you: Is your decision final? Are you sure that when the
vacations are over you will see things just as you do now?'

'I am quite sure of it,' he replied.

The emphasis was merely natural to him. He could not so govern his
voice as to convey the respectful regret which at this moment he felt.
A younger lady, one who had heightened the charm of her compliment with
subtle harmony of tones and strongly feminine gaze, would perhaps have
elicited from him a free confession. Gratitude and admiration would
have made him capable of such frankness. But in the face of this
newspaper-reading woman (yes, he had unaccountably felt it jar upon him
that a lady should be reading a newspaper), under her matronly smile,
he could do no more than plump out his 'quite sure'. To Lady Whitelaw
it sounded altogether too curt; she was conscious of her position as
patroness, and had in fact thought it likely that the young man would
be disposed to gratify her curiosity in some measure.

'I can only say that I am sorry to hear it,' fell from her tightened
lips, after a moment's pause.

Instantly Godwin's pride expelled the softer emotion. He pressed hard
with his feet upon the floor, every nerve in his body tense with that
distressing passion peculiar to the shyly arrogant. Regard him, and you
had imagined he was submitting to rebuke for an offence he could not
deny.

Lady Whitelaw waited. A minute, almost, and Peak gave no sign of
opening his mouth.

'It is certainly much to be regretted,' she said at length, coolly. 'Of
course, I don't know what prospects you may have in London, but, if you
had remained at the College, something advantageous would no doubt have
offered before long.'

There went small tact to the wording of this admonition. Impossible for
Lady Whitelaw to understand the complexities of a character such as
Godwin's, even had she enjoyed opportunities of studying it; but many a
woman of the world would have directed herself more cautiously after
reading that letter of his. Peak's impulse was to thank her for the
past, and declare that henceforth he would dispense with aid; only the
choking in his throat obstructed some such utterance. He resented
profoundly her supposition (natural enough) that his chief aim was to
establish himself in a self-supporting career. What? Am I to be
grateful for a mere chance of earning my living? Have I not shown that
I am capable of something more than the ordinary lot in life? From the
heights of her assured independence, does she look down upon me as a
young man seeking a 'place'? He was filled with wrath, and all because
a good, commonplace woman could not divine that he dreamt of European
fame.

'I am very sorry that I can't take that into account,' he managed to
say. 'I wish to give this next year exclusively to scientific study,
and after that I shall see what course is open to me.'

He was not of the men who can benefit by patronage, and be simply
grateful for it. His position was a false one: to be begging with
awkward show of thankfulness for a benefaction which in his heart he
detested. He knew himself for an undesigning hypocrite, and felt that
he might as well have been a rascal complete. Gratitude! No man capable
of it in fuller measure than he; but not to such persons as Lady
Whitelaw. Before old Sir Job he could more easily have bowed himself.
But this woman represented the superiority of mere brute wealth,
against which his soul rebelled.

There was another disagreeable silence, during which Lady Whitelaw
commented on her protege very much as Mrs. Warricombe had done.

'Will you allow me to ask,' she said at length, with cold politeness,
'whether you have acquaintances in London?'

'Yes. I know some one who studied at the School of Mines.'

'Well, Mr. Peak, I see that your mind is made up. And no doubt you are
the best judge of your private circumstances. I must ask you to let me
think over the matter for a day or two. I will write to you.'

'And I to you,' thought Godwin; a resolve which enabled him to rise
with something like a conventional smile, and thus put an end to a very
brief and quite unsatisfactory interview.

He strode homewards in a state of feverish excitement. His own
behaviour had been wretchedly clownish; he was only too well aware of
that. He ought to have put aside all the grosser aspects of his case,
and have exhibited the purely intellectual motives which made such a
change as he purposed seem desirable to him. That would have been to
act with dignity; that would have been the very best form of gratitude
for the kindness he had received. But no, his accursed lack of
self-possession had ruined all. 'The woman was now offended in good
earnest; he saw it in her face at parting. The fault was admittedly on
his side, but what right had she to talk about 'something
advantageous'? She would write to him, to be sure; that meant, she
could not yet make up her mind whether to grant the money or not. Pluto
take the money! Long before sitting down to her glossy note-paper she
should have received a letter from _him_.

Composed already. Now he was up in the garret bedroom, scribbling as
fast as pen could fly over paper. He had been guilty of a mistake--so
ran the epistle; having decided to leave Whitelaw, he ought never to
have requested a continuance of the pension. He begged Lady Whitelaw
would forgive this thoughtless impropriety; she had made him understand
the full extent of his error. Of course he could not accept anything
more from her. As for the past, it would be idle for him to attempt an
expression of his indebtedness. But for Sir Job's munificence, he must
now have been struggling to complete a radically imperfect
education,--'instead of going into the world to make a place for myself
among the scientific investigators of our time'.

One's claims to respectful treatment must be put forward unmistakably,
especially in dealing with such people as Lady Whitelaw. Now, perhaps,
she would understand what his reserve concealed. The satisfaction of
declining further assistance was enormous. He read his letter several
times aloud. This was the great style; he could imagine this incident
forming a landmark in the biography of a notable man. Now for a fair
copy, and in a hand, mind you, that gave no hint of his care for
caligraphic seemliness: bold, forthright.

The letter in his pocket, he went downstairs. His mother had been out
all the morning; now she was just returned, and Godwin saw trouble on
her forehead. Anxiously she inquired concerning the result of his
interview.

Now that it was necessary to make an intelligible report of what had
happened, Godwin found his tongue falter. How could he convey to
another the intangible sense of wounded dignity which had impelled his
pen? Instead of producing the letter with a flourish, he answered with
affected carelessness:

'I am to hear in a day or two.'

'Did she seem to take it--in the right way?'

'She evidently thinks of me too much as a schoolboy.'

And he began to pace the room. Mrs. Peak sat still, with an air of
anxious brooding.

'You don't think she will refuse, Godwin?' fell from her presently.

His hand closed on the letter.

'Why? Well, in that case I should go to London and find some occupation
as soon as possible. You could still let me have the same money as
before?'

'Yes.'

It was said absently, and did not satisfy Godwin. In the course of the
conversation it appeared that Mrs. Peak had that morning been to see
the legal friend who looked after her small concerns, and though she
would not admit that she had any special cause for uneasiness, her son
recalled similar occasions when an interview with Mr. Dutch had been
followed by several days' gloom. The truth was that Mrs Peak could not
live strictly within the income at her disposal, and on being from time
to time reminded of this, she was oppressed by passing worry. If Godwin
and Oliver 'got on well,' things would come all right in the end, but
in the meantime she could not face additional expenditure. Godwin did
not like to be reminded of the razor's edge on which the affairs of the
household were balanced. At present it brought about a very sudden
change in his state of mind; he went upstairs again, and sat with the
letter before him, sunk in misery. The reaction had given him a
headache.

A fortnight, and no word from Lady Whitelaw. But neither was Godwin's
letter posted.

Was he at liberty to indulge the self-respect which urged him to write?
In a moment of heated confidence it was all very well to talk of
'getting some occupation' in London, but he knew that this might prove
no easy matter. A year's work at the School of Mines would decidedly
facilitate his endeavour; and, seeing that his mother's peace depended
upon his being speedily self-supporting, was it not a form of
selfishness to reject help from one who could well afford it? From a
distance, he regarded Lady Whitelaw with more charity; a longer talk
with her might have led to better mutual apprehension. And, after all,
it was not she but her husband to whom he would stand indebted. Sir Job
was a very kind-hearted old fellow; he had meant thoroughly well. Why,
clearly, the bestower of this third year's allowance would not be Lady
Whitelaw at all.

If it were granted. Godwin began to suffer a troublesome misgiving;
perchance he had gone too far, and was now, in fact, abandoned to his
own resources.

Three weeks. Then came the expected letter, and, as he opened it, his
heart leaped at the sight of a cheque--talisman of unrivalled power
over the emotions of the moneyless! Lady Whitelaw wrote briefly and
formally. Having considered Godwin's request, she had no reason for
doubting that he would make a good use of the proposed year at the
School of Mines, and accordingly she sent him the sum which Sir Job had
intended for his final session at Whitelaw College. She wished him all
benefit from his studies, and prosperity henceforth.

Rejoicing, though shame-smitten, Godwin exhibited this remittance to
his mother, from whom it drew a deep sigh of relief. And forthwith he
sat down to write quite a different letter from that which still lay in
his private drawer,--a letter which he strove to make the justification
(to his own mind) of this descent to humility. At considerable length
he dwelt upon the change of tastes of which he had been conscious
lately, and did not fail to make obvious the superiority of his
ambition to all thought of material advancement. He offered his thanks,
and promised to give an account of himself (as in duty bound) at the
close of the twelvemonths' study he was about to undertake: a letter in
which the discerning would have read much sincerity, and some pathos;
after all, not a letter to be ashamed of. Lady Whitelaw would not
understand it; but then, how many people are capable of even faintly
apprehending the phenomena of mental growth?

And now to plan seriously his mode of life in London. With Christian
Moxey he was so slightly acquainted that it was impossible to seek his
advice with regard to lodgings; besides, the lodgings must be of a
character far too modest to come within Mr. Moxey's sphere of
observation. Other acquaintance he had none in the capital, so it was
clear that he must enter boldly upon the unknown world, and find a home
for himself as best he might. Mrs. Peak could offer suggestions as to
likely localities, and this was of course useful help. In the meantime
(for it would be waste of money to go up till near the end of the
holiday season) he made schemes of study and completed his information
concerning the School of Mines. So far from lamenting the interruption
of his promising career at Whitelaw, he persuaded himself that Uncle
Andrew had in truth done him a very good turn: now at length he was
fixed in the right course. The only thing he regretted was losing sight
of his two or three student-friends, especially Earwaker and Buckland
Warricombe. They, to be sure, would soon guess the reason of his
disappearance. Would they join in the laughter certain to be excited by
'Peak's Dining and Refreshment Rooms'? Probably; how could they help
it? Earwaker might be superior to a prejudice of that kind; his own
connections were of humble standing. But Warricombe must wince and
shrug his shoulders. Perhaps even some of the Professors would have
their attention directed to the ludicrous mishap: they were gentlemen,
and, even though they smiled, must certainly sympathise with him.

Wait a little. Whitelaw College should yet remember the student who
seemed to have vanished amid the world's obscure tumult.

Resolved that he was about to turn his back on Twybridge for ever, he
found the conditions of life there quite supportable through this last
month or two; the family reaped benefit from his improved temper. Even
to Mr. Cusse he behaved with modified contempt. Oliver was judicious
enough to suppress his nigger minstrelsy and kindred demonstrations of
spirit in his brother's presence, and Charlotte, though steadily
resentful, did her best to avoid conflict.

Through the Misses Lumb, Godwin's change of purpose had of course
become known to his aunt, who for a time took it ill that these debates
had been concealed from her. When Mrs. Peak, in confidence, apprised
her of the disturbing cause, Miss Cadman's indignation knew no bounds.
What! That low fellow had been allowed to interfere with the progress
of Godwin Peak's education, and not a protest uttered? He should have
been _forbidden_ to establish himself in Kingsmill! Why had they not
taken _her_ into council? She would have faced the man, and have
overawed him; he should have been made to understand the gross
selfishness of his behaviour. Never had she heard of such a monstrous
case--

Godwin spent much time in quiet examination of the cabinets bequeathed
to him by Mr. Gunnery. He used a pound or two of Lady Whitelaw's money
for the purchase of scientific books, and set to work upon them with
freshened zeal. The early morning and late evening were given to
country walks, from which he always returned with brain excited by the
forecast of great achievements.

When the time of his departure approached, he decided to pay a farewell
visit to Mr. Moxey. He chose an hour when the family would probably be
taking their ease in the garden. Three of the ladies were, in fact,
amusing themselves with croquet, while their father, pipe in mouth,
bent over a bed of calceolarias.

'What's this that I hear?' exclaimed Mr. Moxey, as he shook hands. 'You
are not going back to Whitelaw?'

The story had of course spread among all Twybridge people who knew
anything of the Peaks, and it was generally felt that some mystery was
involved. Godwin had reasonably feared that his obligations to Sir Job
Whitelaw must become known; impossible for such a matter to be kept
secret; all who took any interest in the young man had long been
privately acquainted with the facts of his position. Now that
discussion was rife, it would have been prudent in the Misses Lumb to
divulge as much of the truth at they knew, but (in accordance with the
law of natural perversity) they maintained a provoking silence. Hence
whispers and suspicious questions, all wide of the mark. No one had as
yet heard of Andrew Peak, and it seemed but too likely that Lady
Whitelaw, for some good reason, had declined to discharge the expenses
of Godwin's last year at the College.

Mr. Moxey himself felt that an explanation was desirable, but he
listened with his usual friendly air to Godwin's account of the
matter--which of course included no mention of Lady Whitelaw.

'Have you friends in London?' he inquired--like everyone else.

'No. Except that your nephew was so kind as to ask me to call on him,
if ever I happened to be there.'

There passed over Mr. Moxey's countenance a curious shadow. Godwin
noticed it, and at once concluded that the manufacturer condemned
Christian for undue advances to one below his own station. The result
of this surmise was of course a sudden coldness on Godwin's part,
increased when he found that Mr. Moxey turned to another subject,
without a word about his nephew.

In less than ten minutes he offered to take leave, and no one urged him
to stay longer. Mr. Moxey made sober expression of good wishes, and
hoped he might hear that the removal to London had proved
'advantageous'. This word sufficed to convert Godwin's irritation into
wrath; he said an abrupt 'good-evening', raised his hat as awkwardly as
usual, and stalked away.

A few paces from the garden gate, he encountered Miss Janet Moxey, just
coming home from walk or visit. Another grab at his hat, and he would
have passed without a word, but the girl stopped him.

'We hear that you are going to London, Mr. Peak.'

'Yes, I am, Miss Moxey.'

She examined his face, and seemed to hesitate.

'Perhaps you have just been to say good-bye to father?'

'Yes.'

Janet paused, looked away, again turned her eyes upon him.

'You have friends there, I hope?' she ventured.

'No, I have none.'

'My cousin--Christian, you remember--would, I am sure, be very glad to
help you in any way.' Her voice sank, and at the same time she coloured
just perceptibly under Godwin's gaze.

'So he assured me,' was the reply. 'But I must learn to be independent,
Miss Moxey.'

Whereupon Godwin performed a salute, and marched forward.

His boxes were packed, and now he had but one more evening in the old
home. It was made less pleasant than it might have been by a piece of
information upon which he by chance alighted in a newspaper. The result
of the Honours examination for the First B.A. at London had just been
made known, and in two subjects a high place was assigned to Bruno
Leathwaite Chilvers--not the first place happily, but it was
disagreeable enough.

Pooh! what matter? What are academic successes? Ten years hence, which
name would have wider recognition--Bruno Chilvers or Godwin Peak? He
laughed with scornful superiority.

No one was to accompany him to the station; on that he insisted. He had
decided for as early a train as possible, that the dolours of
leave-taking might be abridged. At a quarter to eight the cab drove up
to the door. Out with the trunks labelled 'London'!

'Take care of the cabinets!' were his last words to his mother. 'I may
want to have them sent before long.'

He implied, what he had not ventured to say plainly, that he was
leaving Twybridge for good, and henceforth would not think of it as
home. In these moments of parting, he resented the natural feeling
which brought moisture to his eyes. He hardened himself against the
ties of blood, and kept repeating to himself a phrase in which of late
he had summed his miseries: 'I was born in exile--born in exile.' Now
at length had he set forth on a voyage of discovery, to end perchance
in some unknown land among his spiritual kith and kin.