CHAPTER II


On the morning after her journey down from London, Mrs. Warricombe
awoke with the conviction that she had caught a cold. Her health was in
general excellent, and she had no disposition to nurse imaginary
ailments, but when some slight disorder broke the routine of her life
she made the most of it, enjoying--much as children do--the importance
with which for the time it invested her. At such seasons she was wont
to regard herself with a mildly despondent compassion, to feel that her
family and her friends held her of slight account; she spoke in a tone
of conscious resignation, often with a forgiving smile. When the girls
redoubled their attentions, and soothed her with gentle words, she
would close her eyes and sigh, seeming to remind them that they would
know her value when she was no more.

'You are hoarse, mother,' Sidwell said to her, when they met at
breakfast.

'Am I, dear? You know I felt rather afraid of the journey. I hope I
shan't be laid up.'

Sidwell advised her not to leave the house to-day. Having seen the
invalid comfortably established in an upper room, she went into the
city on business which could not be delayed. On her way occurred the
meeting with Peak, but of this, on her return, she made no mention.
Mother and daughter had luncheon upstairs, and Sidwell was full of
affectionate solicitude.

'This afternoon you had better lie down for an hour or two,' she said.

'Do you think so? Just drop a line to father, and warn him that we may
kept here for some time.'

'Shall I send for Dr Endacott?'

'Just as you like, dear.'

But Mrs. Warricombe had eaten such an excellent lunch, that Sidwell
could not feel uneasy.

'We'll see how you are this evening. At all events, it will be safer
for you not to go downstairs. If you lie quiet for an hour or two, I
can look for those pamphlets that father wants.'

'Just as you like, dear.'

By three o'clock the invalid was calmly slumbering. Having entered the
bedroom on tiptoe and heard regular breathing, Sidwell went down and
for a few minutes lingered about the hall. A servant came to her for
instructions on some domestic matter; when this was dismissed she
mentioned that, if anyone called, she would be found in the library.

The pamphlets of which her father had spoken were soon discovered. She
laid them aside, and seated herself by the fire, but without leaning
back. At any sound within or outside the house she moved her head to
listen. Her look was anxious, but the gleam of her eyes expressed
pleasurable agitation.

At half-past three she went into the drawing-room, where all the
furniture was draped, and the floor bare. Standing where she could look
from a distance through one of the windows, at which the blind had been
raised, she waited for a quarter of an hour. Then the chill atmosphere
drove her back to the fireside. In the study, evidences of temporary
desertion were less oppressive, but the windows looked only upon a
sequestered part of the garden. Sidwell desired to watch the approach
from the high-road, and in a few minutes she was again in the
drawing-room. But scarcely had she closed the door behind her when a
ringing of the visitors' bell sounded with unfamiliar distinctness. She
started, hastened from the room, fled into the library, and had time to
seat herself before she heard the footsteps of a servant moving in
answer to the summons.

The door opened, and Peak was announced.

Sidwell had never known what it was to be thus overcome with emotion.
Shame at her inability to command the calm features with which she
would naturally receive a caller flushed her cheeks and neck; she
stepped forward with downcast eyes, and only in offering her hand could
at length look at him who stood before her. She saw at once that Peak
was unlike himself; he too had unusual warmth in his countenance, and
his eyes seemed strangely large, luminous. On his forehead were drops
of moisture.

This sight restored her self-control, or such measure of it as
permitted her to speak in the conventional way.

'I am sorry that mother can't leave her room. She had a slight cold
this morning, but I didn't think it would give her any trouble.'

Peak was delighted, and betrayed the feeling even whilst he constrained
his face into a look of exaggerated anxiety.

'It won't be anything serious, I hope? The railway journey, I'm afraid.'

'Yes, the journey. She has a slight hoarseness, but I think we shall
prevent it from'----

Their eyes kept meeting, and with more steadfastness. They were
conscious of mutual scrutiny, and, on both sides, of changes since they
last met. When two people have devoted intense study to each other's
features, a three months' absence not only revives the old impressions
but subjects them to sudden modification which engrosses thought and
feeling. Sidwell continued to utter commonplaces, simply as a means of
disguising the thoughts that occupied her; she was saying to herself
that Peak's face had a purer outline than she had believed, and that
his eyes had gained in expressiveness. In the same way Godwin said and
replied he knew not what, just to give himself time to observe and
enjoy the something new--the increased animation or subtler facial
movements--which struck him as often as he looked at his companion.
Each wondered what the other had been doing, whether the time had
seemed long or short.

'I hope you have kept well?' Sidwell asked.

Godwin hastened to respond with civil inquiries.

'I was very glad to hear from Mr. Warricombe a few days ago, he
continued. Sidwell was not aware that her father had written, but her
pleased smile seemed to signify the contrary.

'She looks younger,' Peak said in his mind. 'Perhaps that London dress
and the new way of arranging her hair have something to do with it. But
no, she looks younger in herself. She must have been enjoying the
pleasures of town.'

'You have been constantly occupied, no doubt,' he added aloud, feeling
at the same time that this was a clumsy expression of what he meant.
Though he had unbuttoned his overcoat, and seated himself as easily as
he could, the absurd tall hat which he held embarrassed him; to deposit
it on the floor demanded an effort of which he was yet incapable.

'I have seen many things and heard much talk,' Sidwell was replying, in
a gay tone. It irritated him; he would have preferred her to speak with
more of the old pensiveness. Yet perhaps she was glad simply because
she found herself again talking with him?

'And you?' she went on. 'It has not been all work, I hope?'

'Oh no! I have had many pleasant intervals.'

This was in imitation of her vivacity. He felt the words and the manner
to be ridiculous, but could not restrain himself. Every moment
increased his uneasiness; the hat weighed in his hands like a lump of
lead, and he was convinced that he had never looked so clownish. Did
her smile signify criticism of his attitude?

With a decision which came he knew not how, he let his hat drop to the
floor and pushed it aside. There, that was better; he felt less of a
bumpkin.

Sidwell glanced at the glossy grotesque, but instantly averted her
eyes, and asked rather more gravely:

'Have you been in Exeter all the time?'

'Yes.'

'But you didn't spend your Christmas alone, I hope?'

'Oh, I had my books.'

Was there not a touch of natural pathos in this? He hoped so; then
mocked at himself for calculating such effects.

'I think you don't care much for ordinary social pleasures, Mr Peak?'

He smiled bitterly.

'I have never known much of them,--and you remember that I look forward
to a life in which they will have little part. Such a life,' he
continued, after a pause, 'seems to you unendurably dull? I noticed
that, when I spoke of it before.'

'You misunderstood me.' She said it so undecidedly that he gazed at her
with puzzled look. Her eyes fell.

'But you like society?'

'If you use the word in its narrowest meaning,' she answered, 'then I
not only dislike society, but despise it.'

She had raised her eyebrows, and was looking coldly at him. Did she
mean to rebuke him for the tone he had adopted? Indeed, he seemed to
himself presumptuous. But if they were still on terms such as these,
was it not better to know it, even at the cost of humiliation? One
moment he believed that he could read Sidwell's thoughts, and that they
were wholly favourable to him; at another he felt absolutely ignorant
of all that was passing in her, and disposed to interpret her face as
that of a conventional woman who had never regarded him as on her own
social plane. These uncertainties, these frequent reversions to a state
of mind which at other times he seemed to have long outgrown, were a
singular feature of his relations with Sidwell. Could such experiences
consist with genuine love? Never had he felt more willing to answer the
question with a negative. He felt that he was come here to act a part,
and that the end of the interview, be it what it might, would only
affect him superficially.

'No,' he replied, with deliberation; 'I never supposed that you had any
interest in the most foolish class of wealthy people. I meant that you
recognise your place in a certain social rank, and regard intercourse
with your equals as an essential of happiness.'

'If I understood why you ask'--she began abruptly, but ceased as she
met his glance. Again he thought she was asserting a distant dignity.

'The question arose naturally out of a train of thought which always
occupies me when I talk with you. I myself belong to no class whatever,
and I can't help wondering how--if the subject ever occurred to
you--you would place me.'

He saw his way now, and, having said thus much, could talk on
defiantly. This hour must decide his fortune with Sidwell, yet his
tongue utterly refused any of the modes of speech which the situation
would have suggested to an ordinary mind. He could not 'make love'.
Instead of humility, he was prompted to display a rough arrogance;
instead of tender phrases, he uttered what sounded like deliberate
rudeness. His voice was less gently tuned than Sidwell had been wont to
hear it. It all meant that he despaired of wooing successfully, and
more than half wished to force some word from Sidwell which would spare
him the necessity of a plain avowal.

But before he had finished speaking, her face changed. A light of
sudden understanding shone in her eyes; her lips softened to a smile of
exquisite gentleness.

'The subject never _did_ occur to me,' she answered. 'How should it? A
friend is a friend.'

It was not strictly true, but in the strength of her emotion she could
forget all that contradicted it.

'A friend--yes.'

Godwin began with the same note of bluntness. But of a sudden he felt
the influence of Sidwell's smile. His voice sank into a murmur, his
heart leapt, a thrill went through his veins.

'I wish to be something more than a friend.'

He felt that it was bald, inadequate. Yet the words had come of their
own accord, on an impulse of unimpaired sincerity. Sidwell's head was
bent.

'That is why I can't take simple things for granted,' he continued, his
gaze fixed upon her. 'If I thought of nothing but friendship, it would
seem rational enough that you should accept me for what I am--a man of
education, talking your own language. Because I have dared to hope
something more, I suffer from the thought that I was not born into your
world, and that you must be always remembering this difference.'

'Do you think me so far behind the age?' asked Sidwell, trying to laugh.

'Classes are getting mixed, confused. Yes, but we are so conscious of
the process that we talk of class distinctions more than of anything
else,--talk and think of them incessantly. You have never heard me make
a profession of Radicalism; _I_ am decidedly behind the age. Be what I
may--and I have spiritual pride more than enough--the fact that I have
relatives in the lower, even the lowest, social class must necessarily
affect the whole course of my life. A certain kind of man declares
himself proud of such an origin--and most often lies. Or one may be
driven by it into rebellion against social privilege. To me, my origin
is simply a grave misfortune, to be accepted and, if possible,
overcome. Does that sound mean-spirited? I can't help it; I want you to
know me.'

'I believe I know you very well,' Sidwell replied.

The consciousness that she was deceived checked the words which were
rising to his lips. Again he saw himself in a pitiful light, and this
self-contempt reflected upon Sidwell. He could not doubt that she was
yielding to him; her attitude and her voice declared it; but what was
the value of love won by imposture? Why had she not intelligence enough
to see through his hypocrisy, which at times was so thin a veil? How
defective must her sympathy be!

'Yet you have seen very little of me,' he said, smiling.

There was a short silence; then he exclaimed in a voice of emotion:

'How I wish we had known each other ever since that day when your
brother brought me to your house near Kingsmill! If we had met and
talked through all those years! But that was impossible for the very
reason which makes me inarticulate now that I wish to say so much. When
you first saw me I was a gawky schoolboy, learning to use my brains,
and knowing already that life had nothing to offer me but a false
position. Whether I remained with my kith and kin, or turned my back
upon them in the hope of finding my equals, I was condemned to a life
of miserable incompleteness. I was born in exile. It took a long time
before I had taught myself how to move and speak like one of the class
to which I belonged by right of intellect. I was living alone in
London, in mean lodging-houses. But the day came when I felt more
confidence in myself. I had saved money, and foresaw that in a year or
two I should be able to carry out a plan, make one serious attempt to
win a position among educated people.'

He stopped. Had he intended a full confession, it was thus he might
have begun it. Sidwell was regarding him, but with a gentle look,
utterly unsuspecting. She was unable to realise his character and his
temptations.

'And have you not succeeded?' she asked, in a low voice.

'Have I? Let me put it to the test. I will set aside every thought of
presumption; forget that I am a penniless student looking forward to a
country curacy; and say what I wished to when we had our last
conversation. Never mind how it sounds. I have dared to hope that some
day I shall ask you to be my wife, and that you won't refuse.'

The word 'wife' reverberated on his ears. A whirl of emotion broke the
defiant calm he had supported for the last few minutes. The silence
seemed to be endless; when he looked at Sidwell, her head was bent, the
eyes concealed by their drooping lids. Her expression was very grave.

'Such a piece of recklessness,' he said at length, 'deserves no answer.'

Sidwell raised her eyes and spoke gently, with voice a little shaken.

'Why should you call it recklessness? I have never thought of the
things that seem to trouble you so much. You were a friend of ours.
Wasn't that enough?'

It seemed to him an evasive reply. Doubtless it was much that she
showed neither annoyance nor prudish reserve. He had won the right of
addressing her on equal terms, but she was not inclined to anticipate
that future day to which he pointed.

'You have never thought of such things, because you have never thought
of me as I of you. Every day of your absence in London has caused me
torments which were due most often to the difference between your
social position and mine. You have been among people of leisure and
refinement and culture. Each evening you have talked with men whom it
cost no effort to make themselves liked and respected. I think of that
with bitterness.'

'But why? I have made many acquaintances; have met very interesting
people. I am glad of it; it enables me to understand you better than I
could before.'

'You are glad on that account?'

'Yes; indeed I am.'

'Dare I think you mean more than a civil phrase?'

'I mean quite simply all that my words imply. I have thought of you,
though certainly without bitterness. No one's conversation in London
interested me so much as yours.'

Soothed with an exquisite joy, Godwin felt his eyes moisten. For a
moment he was reconciled to all the world, and forgot the hostilities
of a lifetime.

'And will it still be so, now, when you go back?' he asked, in a soft
tone.

'I am sure it will.'

'Then it will be strange if I ever feel bitterly again.'

Sidwell smiled.

'You could have said nothing that could please me more. Why should your
life be troubled by these dark moods? I could understand it if you were
still struggling with--with doubts, with all manner of uncertainties
about your course'----

She hesitated, watching his face.

'You think I have chosen well?' said Godwin, meeting her look.

Sidwell's eyes were at once averted.

'I hope,' she said, 'we may talk of that again very soon. You have told
me much of yourself, but I have said little or nothing of my
own--difficulties. It won't be long before we come back from London,
and then'----

Once more their eyes met steadily.

'You think,' Godwin asked, 'that I am right in aiming at a life of
retirement?'

'It is one of my doubts. Your influence would be useful anywhere; but
most useful, surely, among people of active mind.'

'Perhaps I shan't be able to choose. Remember that I am seeking for a
livelihood as well as for a sphere of usefulness.'

His eyes fell as he spoke. Hitherto he had had no means of learning
whether Sidwell would bring her husband a dowry substantial enough to
be considered. Though he could not feel that she had betrothed herself
to him, their talk was so nearly that of avowed lovers that perchance
she would disclose whatever might help to put his mind at rest. The
thought revived his painful self-consciousness; it was that of a
schemer, yet would not the curse of poverty have suggested it to any
man?

'Perhaps you won't be able to choose--at first,' Sidwell assented,
thereby seeming to answer his unspoken question. 'But I am sure my
father will use whatever influence he has.'

Had he been seated near enough, he would have been tempted to the
boldness of taking her hand. What more encouragement did he await? But
the distance between them was enough to check his embarrassed impulses.
He could not even call her 'Sidwell'; it would have been easier a few
minutes ago, before she had begun to speak with such calm friendliness.
Now, in spite of everything, he felt that to dare such a familiarity
must needs call upon him the reproof of astonished eyes.

'You return to-morrow?' he asked, suddenly.

'I think so. You have promised me to be cheerful until we are home
again.'

'A promise to be cheerful wouldn't mean much. But it _does_ mean much
that I can think of what you have said to-day.'

Sidwell did not speak, and her silence seemed to compel him to rise. It
was strange how remote he still felt from her pure, grave face, and the
flowing outlines of her figure. Why could he not say to her, 'I love
you; give me your hands; give me your lips'? Such words seemed
impossible. Yet passion thrilled in him as he watched the grace of her
movements, the light and shadow upon her features. She had risen and
come a step or two forward.

'I think you look taller--in that dress.'

The words rather escaped him than were spoken. His need was to talk of
common things, of trifles, that so he might come to feel humanly.

Sidwell smiled with unmistakable pleasure.

'Do I? Do you like the dress?'

'Yes. It becomes you.'

'Are you critical in such things?'

'Not with understanding. But I should like to see you every day in a
new and beautiful dress.'

'Oh, I couldn't afford it!' was the laughing reply.

He offered his hand; the touch of her warm, soft fingers fired his
blood.

'Sidwell!'

It was spoken at last, involuntarily, and he stood with his eyes on
hers, her hand crushed in his.

'Some day!' she whispered.

If their lips met, the contact was so slight as to seem accidental; it
was the mere timorous promise of a future kiss. And both were glad of
the something that had imposed restraint.

When Sidwell went up to her mother's sitting-room, a servant had just
brought tea.

'I hear that Mr. Peak has been,' said Mrs. Warricombe, who looked puffy
and uncomfortable after her sleep. 'Emma was going to take tea to the
study, but I thought it unnecessary. How could he know that we were
here?'

'I met him this morning on my way into the town.'

'Surely it was rather inconsiderate of him to call.'

'He asked if he might.'

Mrs. Warricombe turned her head and examined Sidwell.

'Oh! And did he stay long?'

'Not very long,' replied Sidwell, who was in quiet good-humour.

'I think it would have been better if you had told him by the servant
that I was not well enough to see callers. You didn't mention that he
might be coming.'

Mrs. Warricombe's mind worked slowly at all times, and at present she
was suffering from a cold.

'Why didn't you speak of it, Sidwell?'

'Really--I forgot,' replied the daughter, lightly.

'And what had he to say?'

'Nothing new, mother. Is your head better, dear?'

There was no answer. Mrs. Warricombe had conceived a vague suspicion
which was so alarming that she would not press inquiries alluding to
it. The encouragement given by her husband to Godwin Peak in the
latter's social progress had always annoyed her, though she could not
frame solid objections. To be sure, to say of a man that he is about to
be ordained meets every possible question that society can put; but
Mrs. Warricombe's uneasiness was in part due to personal dislike.
Oftener than not, she still thought of Peak as he appeared some eleven
years ago--an evident plebeian, without manners, without a redeeming
grace. She knew the story of his relative who had opened a shop in
Kingsmill; thinking of that now, she shuddered.

Sidwell began to talk of indifferent matters, and Peak was not again
mentioned.

Her throat being still troublesome, Mrs. Warricombe retired very soon
after dinner. About nine o'clock Sidwell went to the library, and sat
down at her father's writing-table, purposing a letter to Sylvia. She
penned a line or two, but soon lapsed into reverie, her head on her
hands. Of a sudden the door was thrown open, and there stood Buckland,
fresh from travel.

'What has brought you?' exclaimed his sister, starting up anxiously,
for something in the young man's look seemed ominous.

'Oh, nothing to trouble about. I had to come down--on business. Mother
gone to bed?'

Sidwell explained.

'All right; doesn't matter. I suppose I can sleep here? Let them get me
a mouthful of something; cold meat, anything will do.'

His needs were quickly supplied, and before long he was smoking by the
library fire.

'I was writing to Sylvia,' said his sister, glancing at her fragmentary
letter.

'Oh!'

'You know she is at Salisbury?'

'Salisbury? No, I didn't.'

His carelessness proved to Sidwell that she was wrong in conjecturing
that his journey had something to do with Miss Moorhouse. Buckland was
in no mood for conversation; he smoked for a quarter of an hour whilst
Sidwell resumed her writing.

'Of course you haven't seen Peak?' fell from him at length.

His sister looked at him before replying.

'Yes. He called this afternoon.'

'But who told him you were here?'

His brows were knitted, and he spoke very abruptly. Sidwell gave the
same explanation as to her mother, and had further to reply that she
alone received the caller.

'I see,' was Buckland's comment.

Its tone troubled Sidwell.

'Has your coming anything to do with Mr. Peak?'

'Yes, it has. I want to see him the first thing to-morrow.

'Can you tell me what about?'

He searched her face, frowning.

'Not now. I'll tell you in the morning.'

Sidwell saw herself doomed to a night of suspense. She could not
confess how nearly the mystery concerned her. Had Buckland made some
discovery that irritated him against Peak? She knew he was disposed to
catch at anything that seemed to tell against Godwin's claims to
respectful treatment, and it surely must be a grave affair to hurry him
on so long a journey. Though she could imagine no ground of fear, the
situation was seriously disturbing.

She tried to go on with her letter, but failed. As Buckland smoked in
silence, she at length rose and said she would go upstairs.

'All right! Shall see you at breakfast. Good-night!'

At nine next morning Mrs. Warricombe sent a message to Buckland that
she wished to see him in her bedroom. He entered hurriedly.

'Cold better, mother? I have only just time to drink a cup of coffee. I
want to catch Peak before he can have left home.'

'Mr. Peak? Why? I was going to speak about him.'

'What were you going to say?' Buckland asked, anxiously.

His mother began in a roundabout way which threatened long detention.
In a minute or two Buckland had gathered enough to interrupt her with
the direct inquiry:

'You don't mean that there's anything between him and Sidwell?'

'I do hope not; but I can't imagine why she should--really, almost make
a private appointment. I am very uneasy, Buckland. I have hardly slept.
Sidwell is rather--you know'----

'The deuce! I can't stop now. Wait an hour or two, and I shall have
seen the fellow. You needn't alarm yourself. He will probably have
disappeared in a few days.'

'What do you mean?' Mrs. Warricombe asked, with nervous eagerness.

'I'll explain afterwards.'

He hurried away. Sidwell was at the breakfast-table. Her eyes seemed to
declare that she had not slept well. With an insignificant word or two,
the young man swallowed his cup of coffee, and had soon left the house.