CHAPTER III


Earwaker spent Christmas with his relatives at Kingsmill. His father
and mother both lived; the latter very infirm, unable to leave the
house; the former a man of seventy, twisted with rheumatism, his face
rugged as a countenance picked out by fancy on the trunk of a big old
oak, his hands scarred and deformed with labour. Their old age was
restful. The son who had made himself a 'gentleman', and who in London
sat at the tables of the high-born, the wealthy, the famous, saw to it
that they lacked no comfort.

A bright, dry morning invited the old man and the young to go forth
together. They walked from the suburb countrywards, and their
conversation was of the time when a struggle was being made to bear the
expense of those three years at Whitelaw--no bad investment, as it
proved. The father spoke with a strong Midland accent, using words of
dialect by no means disagreeable to the son's ear--for dialect is a
very different thing from the bestial jargon which on the lips of the
London vulgar passes for English. They were laughing over some half
grim reminiscence, when Earwaker became aware of two people who were
approaching along the pavement, they also in merry talk. One of them he
knew; it was Christian Moxey.

Too much interested in his companion to gaze about him, Christian came
quite near before his eyes fell on Earwaker. Then he started with a
pleasant surprise, changed instantly to something like embarrassment
when he observed the aged man. Earwaker was willing to smile and go by,
had the other consented; but a better impulse prevailed in both. They
stopped and struck hands together.

'My father,' said the man of letters, quite at his ease.

Christian was equal to the occasion; he shook hands heartily with the
battered toiler, then turned to the lady at his side.

'Janet, you guess who this is.--My cousin, Earwaker, Miss Janet Moxey.'

Doubtless Janet was aware that her praises had suffered no diminution
when sung by Christian to his friends. Her eyes just fell, but in a
moment were ready with their frank, intelligent smile. Earwaker
experienced a pang--ever so slight--suggesting a revision of his
philosophy.

They talked genially, and parted with good wishes for the New Year.

Two days later, on reaching home, Earwaker found in his letter-box a
scrap of paper on which were scribbled a few barely legible lines.
'Here I am!' he at length deciphered. 'Got into Tilbury at eleven this
morning. Where the devil are you? Write to Charing Cross Hotel.' No
signature, but none was needed. Malkin's return from New Zealand had
been signalled in advance.

That evening the erratic gentleman burst in like a whirlwind. He was
the picture of health, though as far as ever from enduing the
comfortable flesh which accompanies robustness in men of calmer
temperament. After violent greetings, he sat down with abrupt gravity,
and began to talk as if in continuance of a dialogue just interrupted.

'Now, don't let us have any misunderstanding. You will please remember
that my journey to England is quite independent of what took place two
years and a half ago. It has _nothing whatever_ to do with those
circumstances.'

Earwaker smiled.

'I tell you,' pursued the other, hotly, 'that I am here to see
_you_--and one or two other old friends; and to look after some
business matters. You will oblige me by giving credit to my assertion!'

'Don't get angry. I am convinced of the truth of what you say.'

'Very well! It's as likely as not that, on returning to Auckland, I
shall marry Miss Maccabe--of whom I have written to you. I needn't
repeat the substance of my letters. I am not in love with her, you
understand, and I needn't say that my intercourse with that family has
been guided by extreme discretion. But she is a very sensible young
lady. My only regret is that I didn't know her half-a-dozen years ago,
so that I could have directed her education. She might have been even
more interesting than she is. But--you are at leisure, I hope,
Earwaker?'

'For an hour or two.'

'Oh, confound it! When a friend comes back from the ends of the
earth!--Yes, yes; I understand. You are a busy man; forgive my
hastiness. Well now, I was going to say that I shall probably call upon
Mrs. Jacox.' He paused, and gave the listener a stern look, forbidding
misconstruction. 'Yes, I shall probably go down to Wrotham. I wish to
put my relations with that family on a proper footing. Our
correspondence has been very satisfactory, especially of late. The poor
woman laments more sincerely her--well, let us say, her folly of two
years and a half ago. She has outlived it; she regards me as a friend.
Bella and Lily seem to be getting on very well indeed. That governess
of theirs--we won't have any more mystery; it was I who undertook the
trifling expense. A really excellent teacher, I have every reason to
believe. I am told that Bella promises to be a remarkable pianist, and
Lily is uncommonly strong in languages. But my interest in them is
merely that of a friend; let it be understood.'

'Precisely. You didn't say whether the girls have been writing to you?'

'No, no, no! Not a line. I have exchanged letters only with their
mother. Anything else would have been indiscreet. I shall be glad to
see them, but my old schemes are things of the past. There is not the
faintest probability that Bella has retained any recollection of me at
all.'

'I daresay not,' assented Earwaker.

'You think so? Very well; I have acted wisely. Bella is still a child,
you know--compared with a man of my age. She is seventeen and a few
months; quite a child! Miss Maccabe is just one-and-twenty; the proper
age. When we are married, I think I shall bring her to Europe for a
year or two. Her education needs that; she will be delighted to see the
old countries.'

'Have you her portrait?'

'Oh no! Things haven't got so far as that. What a hasty fellow you are,
Earwaker! I told you distinctly'----

He talked till after midnight, and at leave-taking apologised profusely
for wasting his friend's valuable time.

Earwaker awaited with some apprehension the result of Malkin's visit to
Wrotham. But the report of what took place on that occasion was
surprisingly commonplace. Weeks passed, and Malkin seldom showed
himself at Staple Inn; when he did so, his talk was exclusively of Miss
Maccabe; all he could be got to say of the young ladies at Wrotham was,
'Nice girls; very nice girls. I hope they'll marry well.' Two months
had gone by, and already the journalist had heard by letter of his
friend's intention to return to New Zealand, when, on coming home late
one night, he found Malkin sitting on the steps.

'Earwaker, I have something very serious to tell you. Give me just a
quarter of an hour.'

What calamity did this tone portend? The eccentric man seated himself
with slow movement. Seen by a good light, his face was not gloomy, but
very grave.

'Listen to me, old friend,' he began, sliding forward to the edge of
his chair. 'You remember I told you that my relations with the Maccabe
family had been marked throughout with extreme discretion.'

'You impressed that upon me.'

'Good! I have never made love to Miss Maccabe, and I doubt whether she
has ever thought of me as a possible husband.'

'Well?'

'Don't be impatient. I want you to grasp the fact. It is important,
because--I am going to marry Bella Jacox.'

'You don't say so?'

'Why not?' cried Malkin, suddenly passing to a state of excitement.
'What objection can you make? I tell you that I am absolutely free to
choose'----

The journalist calmed him, and thereupon had to hear a glowing account
of Bella's perfections. All the feeling that Malkin had suppressed
during these two months rushed forth in a flood of turbid eloquence.

'And now,' he concluded, 'you will come down with me to Wrotham. I
don't mean to-night; let us say the day after tomorrow, Sunday. You
remember our last joint visit! Ha, ha!'

'Mrs. Jacox is reconciled?'

'My dear fellow, she rejoices! A wonderful nobility in that poor little
woman! She wept upon my shoulder! But you must see Bella! I shan't take
her to New Zealand, at all events not just yet. We shall travel about
Europe, completing her education. Don't you approve of that?'

On Sunday, the two travelled down into Kent. This time they were
received by Lily, now a pretty, pale, half-developed girl of fifteen.
In a few minutes her sister entered. Bella was charming; nervousness
made her words few, and it could be seen that she was naturally
thoughtful, earnest, prone to reverie; her beauty had still to ripen,
and gave much promise for the years between twenty and thirty. Last of
all appeared Mrs. Jacox, who blushed as she shook hands with Earwaker,
and for a time was ill at ease; but her vocatives were not long
restrained, and when all sat down to the tea-table she chattered away
with astonishing vivacity. After tea the company was joined by a lady
of middle age, who, for about two years, had acted as governess to the
girls. Earwaker formed his conclusions as to the 'trifling expense'
which her services represented; but it was probably a real interest in
her pupils which had induced a person of so much refinement to bear so
long with the proximity of Mrs. Jacox.

'A natural question occurs to me,' remarked Earwaker, as they were
returning. 'Who and what was Mr. Jacox?'

'Ah! Bella was talking to me about him the other day. He must have been
distinctly an interesting man. Bella had a very clear recollection of
him, and she showed me two or three photographs. Engaged in some kind
of commerce. I didn't seek particulars. But a remarkable man, one can't
doubt.'

He resumed presently.

'Now don't suppose that this marriage entirely satisfies me. Bella has
been fairly well taught, but not, you see, under my supervision. I
ought to have been able to watch and direct her month by month. As it
is, I shall have to begin by assailing her views on all manner of
things. Religion, for example. Well, I have no religion, that's plain.
I might call myself this or that for the sake of seeming respectable,
but it all comes to the same thing. I don't mind Bella going to church
if she wishes, but I must teach her that there's no merit whatever in
doing so. It isn't an ideal marriage, but perhaps as good as this
imperfect world allows. If I have children, I can then put my
educational theories to the test.'

By way of novel experience, Earwaker, not long after this, converted
his study into a drawing-room, and invited the Jacox family to taste
his tea and cake. With Malkin's assistance, the risky enterprise was
made a great success. When Mrs. Jacox would allow her to be heard,
Bella talked intelligently, and showed eager interest in the details of
literary manufacture.

'O Mr. Earwaker!' cried her mother, when it was time to go. 'What a
delightful afternoon you have given us! We must think of you from now
as one of our very best friends. Mustn't we, Lily?'

But troubles were yet in store. Malkin was strongly opposed to a
religious marriage; he wished the wedding to be at a registrar's
office, and had obtained Bella's consent to this, but Mrs. Jacox would
not hear of such a thing. She wept and bewailed herself. 'How _can_ you
think of being married like a costermonger? O Mr. Malkin, you will
break my heart, indeed you will!' And she wrote an ejaculatory letter
to Earwaker, imploring his intercession. The journalist took his friend
in hand.

'My good fellow, don't make a fool of yourself. Women are born for one
thing only, the Church of England marriage service. How can you seek to
defeat the end of their existence? Give in to the inevitable. Grin and
bear it.'

'I can't! I won't! It shall be a runaway match! I had rather suffer the
rack than go through an ordinary wedding!'

Dire was the conflict. Down at Wrotham there were floods of tears. In
the end, Bella effected a compromise; the marriage was to be at a
church, but in the greatest possible privacy. No carriages, no gala
dresses, no invitations, no wedding feast; the bare indispensable
formalities. And so it came to pass. Earwaker and the girl's governess
were the only strangers present, when, on a morning of June, Malkin and
Bella were declared by the Church to be henceforth one and indivisible.
The bride wore a graceful travelling costume; the bridegroom was in
corresponding attire.

'Heaven be thanked, that's over!' exclaimed Malkin, as he issued from
the portal. 'Bella, we have twenty-three minutes to get to the railway
station. Don't cry!' he whispered to her. 'I can't stand that!'

'No, no; don't be afraid,' she whispered back. 'We have said good-bye
already.'

'Capital! That was very thoughtful of you.--Goodbye, all! Shall write
from Paris, Earwaker. Nineteen minutes; we shall just manage it!'

He sprang into the cab, and away it clattered.

A letter from Paris, a letter from Strasburg, from Berlin,
Munich--letters about once a fortnight. From Bella also came an
occasional note, a pretty contrast to the incoherent enthusiasm of her
husband's compositions. Midway in September she announced their
departure from a retreat in Switzerland.

'We are in the utmost excitement, for it is now decided that in three
days we start for Italy! The heat has been terrific, and we have waited
on what seems to me the threshold of Paradise until we could hope to
enjoy the delights beyond. We go first to Milan. My husband, of course,
knows Italy, but he shares my impatience. I am to entreat you to write
to Milan, with as much news as possible. Especially have you heard
anything more of Mr. Peak?'

November the pair spent in Rome, and thence was despatched the
following in Malkin's hand:

'This time I am _not_ mistaken! I have seen Peak. He didn't see me;
perhaps wouldn't have known me. It was in Piale's reading-room. I had
sat down to _The Times_, when a voice behind me sounded in such a
curiously reminding way that I couldn't help looking round. It was
Peak; not a doubt of it. I might have been uncertain about his face,
but the voice brought back that conversation at your rooms too
unmistakably--long ago as it was. He was talking to an American, whom
evidently he had met somewhere else, and had now recognised. "I've had
a fever," he said, "and can't quite shake off the results. Been in
Ischia for the last month. I'm going north to Vienna." Then the two
walked away together. He looked ill, sallow, worn out. Let me know if
you hear.'

On that same day, Earwaker received another letter, with the Roman
post-mark. It was from Peak.

'I have had nothing particular to tell you. A month ago I thought I
should never write to you again; I got malarial fever, and lay
desperately ill at the _Ospedale Internazionale_ at Naples. It came of
some monstrous follies there's no need to speak of. A new and valuable
experience. I know what it is to look steadily into the eyes of Death.

'Even now, I am far from well. This keeps me in low spirits. The other
day I was half decided to start for London. I am miserably alone, want
to see a friend. What a glorious place Staple Inn seemed to me as I lay
in the hospital! Proof how low I had sunk: I thought longingly of
Exeter, of a certain house there--never mind!

'I write hastily. An invitation from some musical people has decided me
to strike for Vienna. Up there, I shall get my health back. The people
are of no account--boarding-house acquaintances--but they may lead to
better. I never in my life suffered so from loneliness.'

This was the eighteenth of November. On the twenty-eighth the postman
delivered a letter of an appearance which puzzled Earwaker. The stamp
was Austrian, the mark 'Wien'. From Peak, therefore. But the writing
was unknown, plainly that of a foreigner.

The envelope contained two sheets of paper. The one was covered with a
long communication in German; on the other stood a few words of
English, written, or rather scrawled, in a hand there was no
recognising:

'Ill again, and alone. If I die, act for me. Write to Mrs. Peak,
Twybridge.'

Beneath was added, 'J. E. Earwaker, Staple Inn, London.'

He turned hurriedly to the foreign writing. Earwaker read a German book
as easily as an English, but German manuscript was a terror to him. And
the present correspondent wrote so execrably that beyond _Geehrter
Herr_, scarcely a word yielded sense to his anxious eyes. Ha! One he
had made out--_gestorben_.

Crumpling the papers into his pocket, he hastened out, and knocked at
the door of an acquaintance in another part of the Inn. This was a man
who had probably more skill in German cursive. Between them, they
extracted the essence of the letter.

He who wrote was the landlord of an hotel in Vienna. He reported that
an English gentleman, named Peak, just arrived from Italy, had taken a
bedroom at that house. In the night, the stranger became very ill, sent
for a doctor, and wrote the lines enclosed, the purport whereof he at
the same time explained to his attendants. On the second day Mr. Peak
died. Among his effects were found circular notes, and a sum of loose
money. The body was about to be interred. Probably Mr. Earwaker would
receive official communications, as the British consul had been
informed of the matter. To whom should _bills_ be sent?

The man of letters walked slowly back to his own abode.

'Dead, too, in exile!' was his thought. 'Poor old fellow!'