CHAPTER III


The wrath which illumined Buckland's countenance as he strode rapidly
towards Longbrook Street was not unmingled with joy. In the deep pocket
of his ulster lay something heavy which kept striking against his leg,
and every such contact spurred him with a sense of satisfaction. All
his suspicions were abundantly justified. Not only would his father and
Sidwell be obliged to confess that his insight had been profounder than
theirs, but he had the pleasure of standing justified before his own
conscience. The philosophy by which he lived was strikingly illustrated
and confirmed.

He sniffed the morning air, enjoyed the firmness of the frozen ground,
on which his boots made a pleasant thud. To be sure, the interview
before him would have its disagreeableness, but Buckland was not one of
those over-civilised men who shrink from every scene of painful
explanation. The detection of a harmful lie was decidedly congenial to
him--especially when he and his had been made its victims. He was now
at liberty to indulge that antipathetic feeling towards Godwin Peak
which sundry considerations had hitherto urged him to repress. Whatever
might have passed between Peak and Sidwell, he could not doubt that his
sister's peace was gravely endangered; the adventurer (with however
much or little sincerity) had been making subtle love to her. Such a
thought was intolerable. Buckland's class-prejudice asserted itself
with brutal vigour now that it had moral indignation for an ally.

He had never been at Peak's lodgings, but the address was long since
noted. Something of disdain came into his eyes as he approached the row
of insignificant houses. Having pulled the bell, he stood at his full
height, looking severely at the number painted on the door.

Mrs. Roots opened to him, and said that her lodger was at home. He gave
his name, and after waiting for a moment was led to the upper floor.
Godwin, who had breakfasted later than usual, still sat by the table.
On Warricombe's entrance, he pushed back his chair and rose, but with
deliberate movement, scarcely smiling. That Buckland made no offer of a
friendly hand did not surprise him. The name of his visitor had alarmed
him with a sudden presentiment. Hardening his features, he stood in
expectancy.

'I want to have a talk with you,' Buckland began. 'You are at leisure,
I hope?'

'Pray sit down.'

Godwin pointed to a chair near the fire, but Warricombe, having thrown
his hat on to a side table, seated himself by one of the windows. His
motions proved that he found it difficult to support a semblance of
courtesy.

'I have come down from London on purpose to see you. Unless I am
strangely misinformed you have been guilty of conduct which I shouldn't
like to call by its proper name.'

Remembering that he was in a little house, with thin partitions, he
kept his voice low, but the effort this cost him was obvious. He looked
straight at Peak, who did not return the gaze.

'Indeed?' said Godwin, coldly. 'What is my crime?'

'I am told that you have won the confidence of my relatives by what
looks like a scheme of gross dishonesty.'

'Indeed? Who has told you so?'

'No one in so many words. But I happened to come across certain
acquaintances of yours in London--people who know you very well indeed;
and I find that they regard your position here as altogether
incredible. You will remember I had much the same feeling myself. In
support of their view it was mentioned to me that you had published an
article in _The Critical_--the date less than a year ago, observe. The
article was anonymous, but I remember it very well. I have re-read it,
and I want you to tell me how the views it expresses can be reconciled
with those you have maintained in conversation with my father.'

He drew from his pocket the incriminating periodical, turned it back at
the article headed 'The New Sophistry', and held it out for inspection.

'Perhaps you would like to refresh your memory.'

'Needless, thank you,' returned Godwin, with a smile--in which the
vanity of an author had its part.

Had Marcella betrayed him? He had supposed she knew nothing of this
article, but Earwaker had perhaps spoken of it to Moxey before
receiving the injunction of secrecy. On the other hand, it might be
Earwaker himself from whom Warricombe had derived his information. Not
impossible for the men to meet, and Earwaker's indignation might have
led him to disregard a friend's confidence.

The details mattered little. He was face to face with the most serious
danger that could befall him, and already he had strung himself to
encounter it. Yet even in the same moment he asked, 'Is it worth while?'

'Did you write this?' Buckland inquired.

'Yes, I wrote it.'

'Then I wait for your explanation.'

'You mustn't expect me to enter upon an elaborate defence,' Godwin
replied, taking his pipe from the mantelpiece and beginning to fill it.
'A man charged with rascality can hardly help getting excited--and that
excitement, to one in your mood, seems evidence against him. Please to
bear in mind that I have never declared myself an orthodox theologian.
Mr. Warricombe is well acquainted with my views; to you I have never
explained them.'

'You mean to say that my father knew of this article?'

'No. I have not spoken of it.'

'And why not?'

'Because, for one thing, I shouldn't write in that way now; and, for
another, the essay seems to imply more than I meant when I did write
it.'

'"Seems to imply"----? I understand. You wish to represent that this
attack on M'Naughten involves no attack on Christianity?'

'Not on Christianity as I understand it.'

Buckland's face expressed profound disgust, but he controlled his
speech.

'Well, I foresaw this. You attacked a new sophistry, but there is a
newer sophistry still, and uncommonly difficult it is to deal with. Mr.
Peak, I have a plain word to say to you. More than a year ago you asked
me for my goodwill, to aid you in getting a social position. Say what
you like, I see now that you dealt with me dishonestly. I can no longer
be your friend in any sense, and I shall do my best to have you
excluded from my parents' house. My father will re-read this essay--I
have marked the significant passages throughout--and will form his own
judgment; I know what it will be.'

'You are within your rights.'

'Undoubtedly,' replied Buckland, with polished insolence, as he rose
from his seat. 'I can't forbid you to go to the house again, but--I
hope we mayn't meet there. It would be very unpleasant.'

Godwin was still pressing down the tobacco in the bowl of his pipe. He
smiled, and glanced about the room. Did Warricombe know how far things
had gone between him and Sidwell? Whether or no, it was certain now
that Sidwell would be informed of this disastrous piece of
authorship--and the result?

What did it matter? There is no struggling against destiny. If he and
Sidwell were ever fated to come together, why, these difficulties would
all be surmounted. If, as seemed more than likely, he was again to be
foiled on the point of success--he could bear it, perhaps even enjoy
the comedy.

'There is no possibility of arguing against determined anger,' he said,
quietly. 'I am not at all inclined to plead for justice: one only does
that with a friend who desires to be just. My opinions are utterly
distasteful to you, and personal motives have made you regard me as--a
scoundrel to be got rid of. Well, there's an end of it. I don't see
what is to be gained by further talk.'

This was a dismissal. Godwin felt the necessity of asserting himself
thus far.

'One question,' said Warricombe, as he put the periodical back into his
pocket. 'What do you mean by my "personal motives"?'

Their eyes met for an instant.

'I mean the motives which you have spoken of.'

It was Buckland's hope that Peak might reveal his relations with
Sidwell, but he shrank from seeming to know anything of the matter.
Clearly, no light was to be had from this source.

'I am afraid,' he said, moving to the door, 'that you will find my
motives shared by all the people whose acquaintance you have made in
Exeter.'

And without further leave-taking he departed.

There was a doubt in his mind. Peak's coolness might be the audacity of
rascaldom; he preferred to understand it so; but it _might_ have
nothing to do with baseness.

'Confound it!' he muttered to himself, irritably. 'In our times life is
so deucedly complicated. It used to be the easiest thing to convict a
man of religious hypocrisy; nowadays, one has to bear in mind such a
multiplicity of fine considerations. There's that fellow Bruno
Chilvers: mightn't anyone who had personal reasons treat him precisely
as I have treated Peak? Both of them _may_ be honest. Yet in Peak's
case all appearances are against him--just because he is of low birth,
has no means, and wants desperately to get into society. The fellow is
a scoundrel; I am convinced of it. Yet his designs may be innocent.
How, then, a scoundrel?----

'Poor devil! Has he really fallen in love with Sidwell?----

'Humbug! He wants position, and the comfort it brings. And if he hadn't
acted like a blackguard--if he had come among us telling the truth--who
knows? Sidwell wouldn't then have thought of him, but for my own part I
would willingly have given him a hand. There are plenty of girls who
have learned to think for themselves.'

This was an unhappy line of reflection. It led to Sylvia Moorhouse--and
to grinding of the teeth. By the time he reached the house, Buckland
was again in remorseless mood.

He would have it out with Sidwell. The desire of proving to her that he
had been right from the first overrode all thought of the pain he might
inflict.

She was in the library. At breakfast he had noticed her heavy eyes, and
that she made only a pretence of eating. She was now less unlike
herself, but her position at the window showed that she had been
waiting impatiently.

'Isn't mother coming down to-day?' he asked.

'Yes; after luncheon she will go out for an hour, if it keeps fine.'

'And to-morrow you return?'

'If mother feels able to travel.'

He had _The Critical_ in his hand, and stood rustling the pages with
his fingers.

'I have been to see Peak.'

'Have you?'

She moved a few steps and seated herself sideways on a small chair.

'My business with him was confoundedly unpleasant. I'm glad it's over.
I wish I had known what I now do half a year ago.'

'Let me hear what it is.'

'You remember that I told you to be on your guard against Peak?'

Sidwell smiled faintly, and glanced at him, but made no answer.

'I knew he wasn't to be trusted,' pursued her brother, with gloomy
satisfaction. 'And I had far better means of judging than father or
you; but, of course, my suspicions were ungenerous and cynical.'

'Will you come to the point?' said Sidwell, in an irritated tone.

'I think you read this article in _The Critical_?' He approached and
showed it to her. 'We spoke of it once, _a propos_ of M'Naughten's
book.'

She raised her eyes, and met his with a look of concern she could not
disguise.

'What of that?'

'Peak is the author of it. It seems to have been written just about the
time when I met him and brought him here as a visitor, and it was
published after he had begun to edify you with his zeal for
Christianity.'

She held out her hand.

'You remember the tone of the thing?' Buckland added. 'I'll leave it
with you; but just glance at one or two of the passages I have marked.
The Anglicanism of their writer is decidedly "broad", it seems to me.'

He moved apart and watched his sister as she bent over the pages. There
was silence for five minutes. Seeing that Sidwell had ceased to read,
he ejaculated, 'Well?'

'Has Mr. Peak admitted the authorship?' she asked, slowly and
distinctly.

'Yes, and with a cool impudence I hardly expected.'

'Do you mean that he has made no attempt to justify himself?'

'None worth listening to. Practically, he refused an explanation.'

Sidwell rested her forehead lightly upon the tips of her fingers; the
periodical slipped from her lap and lay open on the floor.

'How did you find this out?'

'In the simplest way. Knowing perfectly well that I had only to get
familiar with some of his old friends to obtain proof that he was an
impostor, I followed up my acquaintance with Miss Moxey--got hold of
her brother--called upon them. Whilst I was there, a man named Malkin
came in, and somehow or other he began talking of Peak. I learned at
once precisely what I expected, that Peak was known to all these people
as a violent anti-Christian. Malkin refused to believe the story of his
going in for the Church--it sounded to him a mere joke. Then came out
the fact that he had written this article. They all knew about it.'

He saw a flush of shame upon Sidwell's half-hidden face. It gratified
him. He was resolved to let her taste all the bitterness of her folly.

'It seems pretty clear that the Moxeys--at all events Miss Moxey--knew
the rascally part he was playing. Whether they wished to unmask him, or
not, I can't say. Perhaps not. Yet I caught an odd look on Miss Moxey's
face when that man Malkin began to talk of Peak's characteristics and
achievements. It came out, by-the-bye, that he had given all his
acquaintances the slip; they had completely lost sight of him--I
suppose until Miss Moxey met him by chance at Budleigh Salterton.
There's some mystery still. She evidently kept Peak's secret from the
Moorhouses and the Walworths. A nice business, altogether!'

Again there was a long silence. Then Sidwell raised her face and said,
abruptly:

'You may be quite mistaken.'

'How?'

'You went to Mr. Peak in a spirit of enmity and anger. It is not likely
he would explain himself. You may have quite misunderstood what he
said.'

'Ridiculous! You mean that he was perhaps "converted" after writing
this article?--Then why did he allow it to be published?'

'He did not sign it. He may have been unable to withdraw it from the
editor's hands.'

'Bosh! He didn't sign it, because the idea of this Exeter campaign came
between the reception and the appearance of his paper. In the ordinary
course of things, he would have been only too glad to see his name in
_The Critical_. The scoundrelly project was conceived perhaps the very
day that I brought him here--perhaps in that moment--at lunch, do you
remember?--when he began to talk of the sermon at the Cathedral?'

'Why did he go to the Cathedral and hear that sermon?'

'To amuse a Sunday morning, I suppose.'

'That is not very likely in a man who hates and ridicules religion.'

'It is decidedly more probable than the idea of his conversion.'

Sidwell fell back again into her brooding attitude.

'The reason of your mistake in judging him,' resumed Buckland, with
emphasis, 'is that you have undervalued his intellect. I told you long
ago that a man of Peak's calibre could not possibly be a supporter of
dogmas and churches. No amount of plausible evidence would have made me
believe in his sincerity. Let me beg you to appreciate the simple fact,
that _no_ young man of brains and education is nowadays an honest
defender of mediaeval Christianity--the Christianity of your churches.
Such fellows may transact with their conscience, and make a more or
less decent business of the clerical career; or, in rare cases, they
may believe that society is served by the maintenance of a national
faith, and accordingly preach with all manner of mental reserves and
symbolical interpretations. These are in reality politicians, not
priests. But Peak belongs to neither class. He is an acute cynic, bent
on making the best of this world, since he believes in no other. How he
must have chuckled after every visit to this house! He despises you,
one and all. Believe me, he regards you with profound contempt.'

Buckland's obtuseness on the imaginative side spared him the
understanding of his sister's state of mind. Though in theory he
recognised that women were little amenable to reasoning, he took it for
granted that a clear demonstration of Peak's duplicity must at once
banish all thought of him from Sidwell's mind. Therefore he was
unsparing in his assaults upon her delusion. It surprised him when at
length Sidwell looked up with flashing, tear-dewed eyes and addressed
him indignantly:

'In all this there is not one word of truth! You know that in
representing the clergy as a body of ignorant and shallow men you speak
out of prejudice. If you believed what you say, you would be yourself
both ignorant and shallow. I can't trust your judgment of anyone
whatever.'

She paused, but in a moment added the remark which would have come
first had she spoken in the order of her thoughts.

'It is because the spirit of contempt is so familiar to you that you
are so ready to perceive it in others. I consider that habit of mind
worse than hypocrisy--yes, worse, far worse!'

Buckland was sorry for the pain he had given. The retort did not affect
him, but he hung his head and looked uncomfortable. His next speech was
in a milder strain:

'I feel it a duty, Sidwell, to represent this man to you in what I
verily believe to be the true light. To be despised by one who is
immeasurably contemptible surely can't distress you. If a butler gets
into your house by means of a forged character, and then lays his plans
for a great burglary, no doubt he scorns you for being so easily taken
in,--and that is an exact parallel to Peak's proceedings. He has
somehow got the exterior of a gentleman; you could not believe that one
who behaved so agreeably and talked so well was concealing an
essentially base nature. But I must remind you that Peak belongs by
origin to the lower classes, which is as much as to say that he lacks
the sense of honour generally inherited by men of our world. A powerful
intellect by no means implies a corresponding development of the moral
sense.'

Sidwell could not close her ears against the argument. But her features
were still set in an expression of resentment, and she kept silence
lest her voice should sound tearful.

'And don't be tempted by personal feeling,' pursued her brother, 'to
make light of hypocrisy--especially this kind. The man who can act such
a part as Peak's has been for the last twelve months must be capable of
any depravity. It is difficult for you to estimate his baseness,
because you are only half convinced that any one can really be an enemy
of religious faith. You suspect a lurking belief even in the minds of
avowed atheists. But take the assurance from me that a man like Peak
(and I am at one with him in this matter) regards with absolute
repugnance every form of supernaturalism. For him to affect belief in
your religion, is a crime against conscience. Peak has committed this
crime with a mercenary motive,--what viler charge could be brought
against him?'

Without looking at him, his sister replied:

'Whether he is guilty or not, I can't yet determine. But the motive of
his life here was not mercenary.'

'Then how would you describe it?' Buckland asked, in astonishment.

'I only know that it can't be called mercenary.'

'Then the distinction you draw must be a very fine one.--He has
abandoned the employment by which he lived, and by his own admission he
looks to the Church for means of support. It was necessary for him to
make interest with people of social position; the closer his relations
with them the better. From month to month he has worked skilfully to
establish his footing in this house, and among your friends. What do
you call this?'

She had no verbal answer to make, but her look declared that she held
to another interpretation.

'Well,' Buckland added, impatiently, 'we will hear father's opinion.
He, remember, has been deceived in a very gross and cruel way. Possibly
he may help you to see the thing in all its hatefulness.'

Sidwell turned to him.

'You go to London this afternoon?'

'In an hour or two,' he replied, consulting his watch.

'Is it any use my asking you to keep silence about everything until I
am back in town?'

Buckland frowned and hesitated.

'To mother as well as father, you mean?'

'Yes. Will you do me this kindness?'

'Answer me a question, Sidwell. Have you any thought of seeing Peak?'

'I can't say,' she replied, in agitation. 'I must leave myself free. I
have a right to use my own judgment.'

'Don't see him! I beg you not to see him!'

He was so earnest that Sidwell suspected some other reason in his
request than regard for her dignity.

'I must leave myself free,' she repeated, with shaking voice. 'In any
case I shall be back in London to-morrow evening--that is, if--but I am
sure mother will wish to go. Grant me this one kindness; say nothing
here or there till I am back and have seen you again.'

He turned a deaf ear, for the persistency with which she resisted proof
of Peak's dishonour had begun to alarm him. Who could say what
miserable folly she might commit in the next four-and-twenty hours? The
unavoidable necessity of his own return exasperated him; he wished to
see her safe back in London, and under her father's care.

'No,' he exclaimed, with a gesture of determination; 'I can't keep such
a thing as this secret for another hour. Mother must know at
once--especially as you mean to invite that fellow into the house
again.--I have half a mind to telegraph to Godolphin that I can't
possibly be with him to-night.'

Sidwell regarded him and spoke with forced composure.

'Do as seems right to you, Buckland. But don't think that by remaining
here you would prevent me from seeing Mr. Peak, if I wish to do so.
That is treating me too much like a child. You have done your
part--doubtless your duty; now I must reflect and judge for myself.
Neither you nor anyone else has authority over me in such
circumstances.'

'Very well. I have no authority, as you say, but common sense bids me
let mother know how the case stands.'

And angrily he left the room.

_The Critical_ still lay where it had fallen. When Sidwell had stood a
while in confused thought, her eye turned to it, and she went hurriedly
to take it up. Yes, that was the first thing to be done, to read those
pages with close care. For this she must have privacy. She ran upstairs
and shut herself in her bedroom.

But did not at once begin to read. It concerned her deeply to know
whether Peak had so expressed himself in this paper, that no room was
left for doubt as to his convictions; but another question pressed upon
her with even more urgency--could it be true that he did not love her?
If Buckland were wholly right, then it mattered little in what degree
she had been misled by intellectual hypocrisy.

It was impossible to believe that Peak had made love to her in cold
blood, with none but sordid impulses. The thought was so humiliating
that her mind resolutely rejected it; and she had no difficulty in
recalling numberless minutiae of behaviour--nuances of look and tone
such as abide in a woman's memory--any one of which would have sufficed
to persuade her that he felt genuine emotion. How had it come to pass
that a feeling of friendly interest, which did not for a moment
threaten her peace, changed all at once to an agitation only the more
persistent the more she tried to subdue it,--how, if it were not that
her heart responded to a passionate appeal, effectual as only the
sincerest love can prove? Prior to that long talk with Godwin, on the
eve of her departure for London, she had not imagined that he loved
her; when they said good-bye to each other, she knew by her own
sensations all that the parting meant to him. She felt glad, instead of
sorry, that they were not to meet again for several months; for she
wished to think of him calmly and prudently, now that he presented
himself to her imagination in so new an aspect. The hand-clasp was a
mutual assurance of fidelity.

'I should never have loved him, if he had not first loved me. Of that I
am as firmly convinced as of my own existence. It is not in my nature
to dream romances. I never did so even as a young girl, and at this age
I am not likely to fall into a foolish self-deception. I had often
thought about him. He seemed to me a man of higher and more complex
type than those with whom I was familiar; but most surely I never
attributed to him even a corresponding interest in me. I am neither
vain, nor very anxious to please; I never suffered because men did not
woo me; I have only moderate good looks, and certainly no uncommon
mental endowments.--If he had been attracted by Sylvia, I should have
thought it natural; and I more than once suspected that Sylvia was
disposed to like him. It seemed strange at first that his choice should
have fallen upon me; yet when I was far away from him, and longed so to
sit once more by him and hear him talk, I understood that it might be
in my power to afford him the companionship he needed.--Mercenary? If I
had been merely a governess in the house, he would have loved me just
the same!'

Only by a painful effort could she remind herself that the ideal which
had grown so slowly was now defaced. He loved her, but it was not the
love of an honest man. After all, she had no need to peruse this
writing of his; she remembered so well how it had impressed her when
she read it on its first appearance, how her father had spoken of it.
Buckland's manifold evidence was irresistible. Why should Peak have
concealed his authorship? Why had he disappeared from among the people
who thoroughly knew him?

She had loved a dream. What a task would it be to distinguish between
those parts of Peak's conversation which represented his real thoughts,
and those which were mockery of his listeners! The plan of a retired
life which he had sketched to her--was it all falsehood? Impossible,
for his love was inextricably blended with the details. Did he imagine
that the secret of his unbelief could be preserved for a lifetime, and
that it would have no effect whatever upon his happiness as a man? This
seemed a likely reading of the problem. But what a multitude of moral
and intellectual obscurities remained! The character which had seemed
to her nobly simple was become a dark and dread enigma.

She knew so little of his life. If only it could all be laid bare to
her, the secret of his position would be revealed. Buckland's violence
altogether missed its mark; the dishonour of such a man as Godwin Peak
was due to no gross incentive.

It was probable that, in talk with her father, he had been guilty of
more deliberate misrepresentation than had marked his intercourse with
the rest of the family. Her father, she felt sure, had come to regard
him as a valuable source of argument in the battle against materialism.
Doubtless the German book, which Peak was translating, bore upon that
debate, and consequently was used as an aid to dissimulation. Thinking
of this, she all but shared her brother's vehement feeling. It pained
her to the inmost heart that her father's generous and candid nature
should thus have been played upon. The deceit, as it concerned herself
alone, she could forgive; at least she could suspend judgment until the
accused had offered his defence--feeling that the psychology of the
case must till then be beyond her powers of analysis. But the wrong
done to her father revolted her.

A tap at the door caused her to rise, trembling. She remembered that by
this time her mother must be aware of the extraordinary disclosure, and
that a new scene of wretched agitation had to be gone through.

'Sidwell!'

It was Mrs. Warricombe's voice, and the door opened.

'Sidwell!--What _does_ all this mean? I don't understand half that
Buckland has been telling me.'

The speaker's face was mottled, and she stood panting, a hand pressed
against her side.

'How very, very imprudent we have been! How wrong of father not to have
made inquiries! To think that such a man should have sat at our table!'

'Sit down, mother; don't be so distressed,' said Sidwell, calmly. 'It
will all very soon be settled.'

'Of course not a word must be said to anyone. How very fortunate that
we shall be in London till the summer! Of course he must leave Exeter.'

'I have no doubt he will. Let us talk as little of it as possible,
mother. We shall go back to-morrow'----

'This afternoon! We will go back with Buckland. That is decided. I
couldn't sleep here another night.'

'We must remain till to-morrow,' Sidwell replied, with quiet
determination.

'Why? What reason can there be?'

Mrs. Warricombe's voice was suspended by a horrible surmise.

'Of course we shall go to-day, Sidwell,' she continued, in nervous
haste. 'To think of that man having the impudence to call and sit
talking with you! If I could have dreamt'----

'Mother,' said Sidwell, gravely, 'I am obliged to see Mr. Peak, either
this evening or to-morrow morning.'

'To--to _see_ him----? Sidwell! What can you mean?'

'I have a reason for wishing to hear from his own lips the whole truth.'

'But we _know_ the whole truth!--What can you be thinking of, dear? Who
is this Mr. Peak that you should ask him to come and see you, under
_any_ circumstances?'

It would never have occurred to Sidwell to debate with her mother on
subtle questions of character and motive, but the agitation of her
nerves made it difficult for her to keep silence under these vapid
outcries. She desired to be alone; commonplace discussion of the misery
that had come upon her was impossible. A little more strain, and she
would be on the point of tears, a weakness she was resolute to avoid.

'Let me think quietly for an hour or two,' she said, moving away. 'It's
quite certain that I must stay here till to-morrow. When Buckland has
gone, we can talk again.'

'But, Sidwell'----

'If you insist, I must leave the house, and find a refuge somewhere
else.'

Mrs. Warricombe tossed her head.

'Oh, if I am not permitted to speak to you! I only hope you won't have
occasion to remember my warning! Such extraordinary behaviour was
surely never known! I should have thought'----

Sidwell was by this time out of the room. Safe in privacy she sat down
as if to pen a letter. From an hour's agitated thought, the following
lines resulted:

'My brother has told me of a conversation he held with you this
morning. He says you admit the authorship of an article which seems
quite inconsistent with what you have professed in our talks. How am I
to understand this contradiction? I beg that you will write to me at
once. I shall anxiously await your reply.'

This, with her signature, was all. Having enclosed the note in an
envelope, she left it on her table and went down to the library, where
Buckland was sitting alone in gloomy reverie. Mrs. Warricombe had told
him of Sidwell's incredible purpose. Recognising his sister's
independence, and feeling sure that if she saw Peak it could only be to
take final leave of him, he had decided to say no more. To London he
must perforce return this afternoon, but he had done his duty
satisfactorily, and just in time. It was plain that things had gone far
between Peak and Sidwell; the latter's behaviour avowed it. But danger
there could be none, with 'The New Sophistry' staring her in the eyes.
Let her see the fellow, by all means. His evasions and hair-splittings
would complete her deliverance.

'There's a train at 1.53,' Buckland remarked, rising, 'and I shall
catch it if I start now. I can't stay for the discomfort of luncheon.
You remain here till to-morrow, I understand?'

'Yes.'

'It's a pity you are angry with me. It seems to me I have done you a
kindness.'

'I am not angry with you, Buckland,' she replied, gently. 'You have
done what you were plainly obliged to do.'

'That's a sensible way of putting it. Let us say goodbye with
friendliness then.'

Sidwell gave her hand, and tried to smile. With a look of pained
affection, Buckland went silently away.

Shortly after, Sidwell fetched her note from upstairs, and gave it to
the housekeeper to be delivered by hand as soon as possible. Mrs
Warricombe remained invisible, and Sidwell went back to the library,
where she sat with _The Critical_ open before her at Godwin's essay.

Hours went by; she still waited for an answer from Longbrook Street.

At six o'clock she went upstairs and spoke to her mother.

'Shall you come down to dinner?'

'No, Sidwell,' was the cold reply. 'Be so good as to excuse me.

Towards eight, a letter was brought to her; it could only be from
Godwin Peak. With eyes which endeavoured to take in all at once, and
therefore could at first distinguish nothing, she scanned what seemed
to be hurriedly written lines.

'I have tried to answer you in a long letter, but after all I can't
send it. I fear you wouldn't understand. Better to repeat simply that I
wrote the article you speak of. I should have told you about it some
day, but now my intentions and hopes matter nothing. Whatever I said
now would seem dishonest pleading. Good-bye.'

She read this so many times that at length she had but to close her
eyes to see every word clearly traced on the darkness. The meanings she
extracted from each sentence were scarcely less numerous than her
perusals. In spite of reason, this enigmatic answer brought her some
solace. He _could_ defend himself; that was the assurance she had
longed for. Impossible (she again and again declared to herself with
emphasis) for their intimacy to be resumed. But in secret she could
hold him, if not innocent, at all events not base. She had not bestowed
her love upon a mere impostor.

But now a mournful, regretful passion began to weigh upon her heart.
She shed tears, and presently stole away to her room for a night of
sorrow.

What must be her practical course? If she went back to London without
addressing another word to him, he must understand her silence as a
final farewell. In that case his departure from Exeter would, no doubt,
speedily follow, and there was little likelihood that she would ever
again see him. Were Godwin a vulgar schemer, he would not so readily
relinquish the advantage he had gained; he would calculate upon the
weakness of a loving woman, and make at least one effort to redeem his
position. As it was, she could neither hope nor fear that he would try
to see her again. Yet she wished to see him, desired it ardently.

And yet--for each impulse of ardour was followed by a cold fit of
reasoning--might not his abandonment of the position bear a meaning
such as Buckland would of course attribute to it? If he were hopeless
of the goodwill of her parents, what profit would it be to him to
retain her love? She was no heiress; supposing him actuated by base
motive, her value in his eyes came merely of his regarding her as a
means to an end.

But this was to reopen the question of whether or not he truly loved
her. No; he was forsaking her because he thought it impossible for her
to pardon the deceit he had undeniably practised--with whatever
palliating circumstances. He was overcome with shame. He imagined her
indignant, scornful.

Why had she written such a short, cold note, the very thing to produce
in his mind a conviction of her resentment?

Hereupon came another paroxysm of tearful misery. It was intensified by
a thought she had half consciously been repressing ever since the
conversation with her brother. Was it true that Miss Moxey had had it
in her power to strip Godwin of a disguise? What, then, were the
relations existing between him and that strangely impressive woman? How
long had they known each other? It was now all but certain that a
strong intellectual sympathy united their minds--and perhaps there had
been something more.

She turned her face upon the pillow and moaned.