CHAPTER III


Three or four years ago, when already he had conceived the idea of
trying his fortune in some provincial town, Peak persuaded himself that
it would not be difficult to make acquaintances among educated people,
even though he had no credentials to offer. He indulged his fancy and
pictured all manner of pleasant accidents which surely, sooner or
later, must bring him into contact with families of the better sort.
One does hear of such occurrences, no doubt. In every town there is
some one or other whom a stranger may approach: a medical man--a local
antiquary--a librarian--a philanthropist; and with moderate advantages
of mind and address, such casual connections may at times be the
preface to intimacy, with all resulting benefits. But experience of
Exeter had taught him how slight would have been his chance of getting
on friendly terms with any mortal if he had depended solely on his
personal qualities. After a nine months' residence, and with the
friendship of such people as the Warricombes, he was daily oppressed by
his isolation amid this community of English folk. He had done his
utmost to adopt the tone of average polished life. He had sat at the
tables of worthy men, and conversed freely with their sons and
daughters; he exchanged greetings in the highways: but this availed him
nothing. Now, as on the day of his arrival, he was an alien--a lodger.
What else had he ever been, since boyhood? A lodger in Kingsmill, a
lodger in London, a lodger in Exeter. Nay, even as a boy he could
scarcely have been said to 'live at home', for from the dawn of
conscious intelligence he felt himself out of place among familiar
things and people, at issue with prevalent opinions. Was he never to
win a right of citizenship, never to have a recognised place among men
associated in the duties and pleasures of life?

Sunday was always a day of weariness and despondency, and at present he
suffered from the excitement of his conversation with Sidwell, followed
as it had been by a night of fever. Extravagant hope had given place to
a depression which could see nothing beyond the immediate gloom. Until
mid-day he lay in bed. After dinner, finding the solitude of his little
room intolerable, he went out to walk in the streets.

Not far from his door some children had gathered in a quiet corner, and
were playing at a game on the pavement with pieces of chalk. As he drew
near, a policeman, observing the little group, called out to them in a
stern voice:

'Now then! what are you doing there? Don't you know _what day_ it is?'

The youngsters fled, conscious of shameful delinquency.

There it was! There spoke the civic voice, the social rule, the public
sentiment! Godwin felt that the policeman had rebuked _him_, and in
doing so had severely indicated the cause of that isolation which he
was condemned to suffer. Yes, all his life he had desired to play games
on Sunday; he had never been able to understand why games on Sunday
should be forbidden. And the angry laugh which escaped him as he went
by the guardian of public morals declared the impossibility of his ever
being at one with communities which made this point the prime test of
worthiness.

He walked on at a great speed, chafing, talking to himself. His way
took him through Heavitree (when Hooker saw the light here, how easy to
believe that the Anglican Church was the noblest outcome of human
progress!) and on and on, until by a lane with red banks of sandstone,
thick with ferns, shadowed with noble boughs, he came to a hamlet which
had always been one of his favourite resorts, so peacefully it lay amid
the exquisite rural landscape. The cottages were all closed and silent;
hark for the reason! From the old church sounded an organ prelude, then
the voice of the congregation, joining in one of the familiar hymns.

A significant feature of Godwin's idiosyncrasy. Notwithstanding his
profound hatred and contempt of multitudes, he could never hear the
union of many voices in song but his breast heaved and a choking warmth
rose in his throat. Even where prejudice wrought most strongly with
him, it had to give way before this rush of emotion; he often hurried
out of earshot when a group of Salvationists were singing, lest the
involuntary sympathy of his senses should agitate and enrage him. At
present he had no wish to draw away. He entered the churchyard, and
found the leafy nook with a tombstone where he had often rested. And as
he listened to the rude chanting of verse after verse, tears fell upon
his cheeks.

This sensibility was quite distinct from religious feeling. If the note
of devotion sounding in that simple strain had any effect upon him at
all, it merely intensified his consciousness of pathos as he thought of
the many generations that had worshipped here, living and dying in a
faith which was at best a helpful delusion. He could appreciate the
beautiful aspects of Christianity as a legend, its nobility as a
humanising power, its rich results in literature, its grandeur in
historic retrospect. But at no moment in his life had he felt it as a
spiritual influence. So far from tending in that direction, as he sat
and brooded here in the churchyard, he owed to his fit of tearfulness a
courage which determined him to abandon all religious pretences, and
henceforth trust only to what was sincere in him--his human passion.
The future he had sketched to Sidwell was impossible; the rural
pastorate, the life of moral endeavour which in his excitement had
seemed so nearly a genuine aspiration that it might perchance become
reality--dreams, dreams! He must woo as a man, and trust to fortune for
his escape from a false position. Sidwell should hear nothing more of
clerical projects. He was by this time convinced that she held far less
tenaciously than he had supposed to the special doctrines of the
Church; and, if he had not deceived himself in interpreting her
behaviour, a mutual avowal of love would involve ready consent on her
part to his abandoning a career which--as he would represent it--had
been adopted under a mistaken impulse. He returned to the point which
he had reached when he set forth with the intention of bidding good-bye
to the Warricombes--except that in flinging away hypocrisy he no longer
needed to trample his desires. The change need not be declared till
after a lapse of time. For the present his task was to obtain one more
private interview with Sidwell ere she went to London, or, if that
could not be, somehow to address her in unmistakable language.

The fumes were dispelled from his brain, and as he walked homeward he
plotted and planned with hopeful energy. Sylvia Moorhouse came into his
mind; could he not in some way make use of her? He had never yet been
to see her at Budleigh Salterton. That he would do forthwith, and
perchance the visit might supply him with suggestions.

On the morrow he set forth, going by train to Exmouth, and thence by
the coach which runs twice a day to the little seaside town. The
delightful drive, up hill and down dale, with its magnificent views
over the estuary, and its ever-changing wayside beauties, put him into
the best of spirits. About noon, he alighted at the Rolle Arms, the
hotel to which the coach conducts its passengers, and entered to take a
meal. He would call upon the Moorhouses at the conventional hour. The
intervening time was spent pleasantly enough in loitering about the
pebbled beach. A south-west breeze which had begun to gather clouds
drove on the rising tide. By four o'clock there was an end of sunshine,
and spurts of rain mingled with flying foam. Peak turned inland,
pursued the leafy street up the close-sheltered valley, and came to the
house where his friends dwelt.

In crossing the garden he caught sight of a lady who sat in a room on
the ground floor; her back was turned to the window, and before he
could draw near enough to see her better she had moved away, but the
glimpse he had obtained of her head and shoulders affected him with so
distinct an alarm that his steps were checked. It seemed to him that he
had recognised the figure, and if he were right.--But the supposition
was ridiculous; at all events so vastly improbable, that he would not
entertain it. And now he descried another face, that of Miss Moorhouse
herself, and it gave him a reassuring smile. He rang the door bell.

How happy--he said to himself--those men who go to call upon their
friends without a tremor! Even if he had not received that shock a
moment ago, he would still have needed to struggle against the
treacherous beating of his heart as he waited for admission. It was
always so when he visited the Warricombes, or any other family in
Exeter. Not merely in consequence of the dishonest part he was playing,
but because he had not quite overcome the nervousness which so
anguished him in earlier days. The first moment after his entering a
drawing-room cost him pangs of complex origin.

His eyes fell first of all upon Mrs. Moorhouse, who advanced to welcome
him. He was aware of three other persons in the room. The nearest, he
could perceive without regarding her, was Sidwell's friend; the other
two, on whom he did not yet venture to cast a glance, sat--or rather
had just risen--in a dim background. As he shook hands with Sylvia,
they drew nearer; one of them was a man, and, as his voice at once
declared, no other than Buckland Warricombe. Peak returned his
greeting, and, in the same moment, gazed at the last of the party. Mrs.
Moorhouse was speaking.

'Mr. Peak--Miss Moxey.'

A compression of the lips was the only sign of disturbance that anyone
could have perceived on Godwin's countenance. Already he had strung
himself against his wonted agitation, and the added trial did not
sensibly enhance what he suffered. In discovering that he had rightly
identified the figure at the window, he experienced no renewal of the
dread which brought him to a stand-still. Already half prepared for
this stroke of fate, he felt a satisfaction in being able to meet it so
steadily. Tumult of thought was his only trouble; it seemed as if his
brain must burst with the stress of its lightning operations. In three
seconds, he re-lived the past, made several distinct anticipations of
the future, and still discussed with himself how he should behave this
moment. He noted that Marcella's face was bloodless; that her attempt
to smile resulted in a very painful distortion of brow and lips. And he
had leisure to pity her. This emotion prevailed. With a sense of
magnanimity, which afterwards excited his wonder, he pressed the cold
hand and said in a cheerful tone:

'Our introduction took place long ago, if I'm not mistaken. I had no
idea, Miss Moxey, that you were among Mrs. Moorhouse's friends.'

'Nor I that you were, Mr. Peak,' came the answer, in a steadier voice
than Godwin had expected.

Mrs. Moorhouse and her daughter made the pleasant exclamations that
were called for. Buckland Warricombe, with a doubtful smile on his
lips, kept glancing from Miss Moxey to her acquaintance and back again.
Peak at length faced him.

'I hoped we should meet down here this autumn.'

'I should have looked you up in a day or two,' Buckland replied,
seating himself. 'Do you propose to stay in Exeter through the winter?'

'I'm not quite sure--but I think it likely.'

Godwin turned to the neighbour of whose presence he was most conscious.

'I hope your brother is well, Miss Moxey?'

Their eyes encountered steadily.

'Yes, he is quite well, thank you. He often says that it seems very
long since he heard from you.'

'I'm a bad correspondent.--Is he also in Devonshire?'

'No. In London.'

'What a storm we are going to have!' exclaimed Sylvia, looking to the
window. 'They predicted it yesterday. I should like to be on the top of
Westdown Beacon--wouldn't you, Miss Moxey?'

'I am quite willing to go with you.'

'And what pleasure do you look for up there?' asked Warricombe, in a
blunt, matter-of-fact tone.

'Now, there's a question!' cried Sylvia, appealing to the rest of the
company.

'I agree with Mr. Warricombe,' remarked her mother. 'It's better to be
in a comfortable room.'

'Oh, you Radicals! What a world you will make of it in time!'

Sylvia affected to turn away in disgust, and happening to glance
through the window she saw two young ladies approaching from the road.

'The Walworths--struggling desperately with their umbrellas.'

'I shouldn't wonder if you think it unworthy of an artist to carry an
umbrella,' said Buckland.

'Now you suggest it, I certainly do. They should get nobly drenched.'

She went out into the hall, and soon returned with her friends--Miss
Walworth the artist, Miss Muriel Walworth, and a youth, their brother.
In the course of conversation Peak learnt that Miss Moxey was the guest
of this family, and that she had been at Budleigh Salterton with them
only a day or two. For the time he listened and observed, endeavouring
to postpone consideration of the dangers into which he had suddenly
fallen. Marcella had made herself his accomplice, thus far, in
disguising the real significance of their meeting, and whether she
would betray him in her subsequent talk with the Moorhouses remained a
matter of doubt. Of course he must have assurance of her
disposition--but the issues involved were too desperate for instant
scrutiny. He felt the gambler's excitement, an irrational pleasure in
the consciousness that his whole future was at stake. Buckland
Warricombe had a keen eye upon him, and doubtless was eager to strike a
train of suspicious circumstances. His face, at all events, should give
no sign of discomposure. Indeed, he found so much enjoyment in the
bright gossip of this assembly of ladies that the smile he wore was
perfectly natural.

The Walworths, he gathered, were to return to London in a week's time.
This meant, in all probability, that Marcella's stay here would not be
prolonged beyond that date. Perhaps he could find an opportunity of
seeing her apart from her friends. In reply to a question from Mrs.
Moorhouse, he made known that he proposed staying at the Rolle Arms for
several days, and when he had spoken he glanced at Marcella. She
understood him; he felt sure. An invitation to lunch here on the morrow
was of course accepted.

Before leaving, he exchanged a few words with Buckland.

'Your relatives will be going to town very soon, I understand.

Warricombe nodded.

'Shall I see you at Exeter?' Godwin continued.

'I'm not sure. I shall go over to-morrow, but it's uncertain whether I
shall still be there when you return.'

The Radical was distinctly less amicable than even on the last occasion
of their meeting. They shook hands in rather a perfunctory way.

Early in the evening there was a temporary lull in the storm; rain no
longer fell, and in spaces of the rushing sky a few stars showed
themselves. Unable to rest at the hotel, Peak set out for a walk
towards the cliff summit called Westdown Beacon; he could see little
more than black vacancies, but a struggle with the wind suited his
temper, and he enjoyed the incessant roar of surf in the darkness.
After an hour of this buffeting he returned to the beach, and stood as
close as possible to the fierce breakers. No person was in sight. But
when he began to move towards the upper shore, three female figures
detached themselves from the gloom and advanced in his direction. They
came so near that their voices were audible, and thereupon he stepped
up to them.

'Are you going to the Beacon after all, Miss Moorhouse?'

Sylvia was accompanied by Agatha Walworth and Miss Moxey. She explained
laughingly that they had stolen out, by agreement, whilst the males of
their respective households still lingered at the dinner-table.

'But Mr. Warricombe was right after all. We shall be blown to pieces. A
very little of the romantic goes a long way, nowadays.'

Godwin was determined to draw Marcella aside. Seemingly she met his
wish, for as all turned to regain the shelter of houses she fell behind
her female companions, and stood close by him.

'I want to see you before you go back to London,' he said, bending his
head near to hers.

'I wrote a letter to you this morning,' was her reply.

'A letter? To what address?'

'Your address at Exeter.'

'But how did you know it?'

'I'll explain afterwards.'

'When can I see you?'

'Not here. It's impossible. I shall go to Exeter, and there write to
you again.'

'Very well. You promise to do this?'

'Yes, I promise.'

There was danger even in the exchange of these hurried sentences. Miss
Walworth had glanced back, and might possibly have caught a phrase that
aroused curiosity. Having accompanied the girls to within view of their
destination, Peak said good-night, and went home to spend the rest of
the evening in thought which was sufficiently absorbing.

The next day he had no sight of Marcella. At luncheon the Moorhouses
were alone. Afterwards Godwin accepted a proposal of the mathematician
(who was generally invisible amid his formulae) for a walk up the Otter
valley. Naturally they talked of Coleridge, whose metaphysical side
appealed to Moorhouse. Peak dwelt on the human and poetical, and was
led by that peculiar recklessness of mood, which at times relieved his
nervous tension, to defend opium eating, as a source of pleasurable
experience.

'You will hardly venture on that paradox in the pulpit,' remarked his
companion, with laughter.

'Perhaps not. But I have heard arguments from that place decidedly more
immoral.'

'No doubt.'

Godwin corrected the impression he perhaps had made by turning with
sudden seriousness to another subject. The ironic temptation was
terribly strong in him just now. One is occasionally possessed by a
desire to shout in the midst of a silent assembly; and impulse of the
same kind kept urging him to utter words which would irretrievably ruin
his prospects. The sense that life is an intolerable mummery can with
difficulty be controlled by certain minds, even when circumstances
offer no keen incitement to rebellion. But Peak's position to-day
demanded an incessant effort to refrain from self-betrayal. What a joy
to declare himself a hypocrite, and snap mocking fingers in the world's
face! As a safeguard, he fixed his mind upon Sidwell, recalled her
features and her voice as clearly as possible, stamped into his heart
the conviction that she half loved him.

When he was alone again, he of a sudden determined to go to Exeter. He
could no longer endure uncertainty as to the contents of Marcella's
letter. As it was too late for the coach, he set off and walked five
miles to Exmouth, where he caught a train.

The letter lay on his table, and with it one on which he recognised his
mother's handwriting.

Marcella wrote in the simplest way, quite as if their intercourse had
never been disturbed. As she happened to be staying with friends at
Budleigh Salterton, it seemed possible for her to meet him. Might she
hope that he would call at the hotel in Exeter, if she wrote again to
make an appointment?

Well, that needed no reply. But how had she discovered the address? Was
his story known in London? In a paroxysm of fury, he crushed the letter
into a ball and flung it away. The veins of his forehead swelled; he
walked about the room with senseless violence, striking his fist
against furniture and walls. It would have relieved him to sob and cry
like a thwarted child, but only a harsh sound, half-groan,
half-laughter, burst from his throat.

The fit passed, and he was able to open the letter from Twybridge, the
first he had received from his mother for more than a month. He
expected to find nothing of interest, but his attention was soon caught
by a passage, which ran thus:

'Have you heard from some friends of yours, called Ward? Some time ago
a lady called here to ask for your address. She said her name was Mrs.
Ward, and that her husband, who had been abroad for a long time, very
much wished to find you again. Of course I told her where you were to
be found. It was just after I had written, or I should have let you
know about it before.'

Ward? He knew no one of that name. Could it be Marcella who had done
this? It looked more than likely; he believed her capable of strange
proceedings.

In the morning he returned to the seaside. Prospect of pleasure there
was none, but by moving about he made the time pass more quickly.
Wandering in the lanes (which would have delighted him with their
autumnal beauties had his mind been at rest), he came upon Miss
Walworth, busy with a water-colour sketch. Though their acquaintance
was so slight, he stopped for conversation, and the artist's manner
appeared to testify that Marcella had as yet made no unfavourable
report of him. By mentioning that he would return home on the morrow,
he made sure that Marcella would be apprised of this. Perhaps she might
shorten her stay, and his suspense.

Back in Longbrook Street once more, he found another letter. It was
from Mrs. Warricombe, who wrote to tell him of their coming removal to
London, and added an invitation to dine four days hence. Then at all
events he would speak again with Sidwell. But to what purpose? Could he
let her go away for months, and perhaps all but forget him among the
many new faces that would surround her. He saw no feasible way of being
with her in private. To write was to run the gravest risk; things were
not ripe for that. To take Martin into his confidence? That asked too
much courage. Deliberate avowals of this kind seemed to him ludicrous
and humiliating, and under the circumstances--no, no; what force of
sincerity could make him appear other than a scheming adventurer?

He lived in tumult of mind and senses. When at length, on the day
before his engagement with the Warricombes, there came a note from
Marcella, summoning him to the interview agreed upon, he could scarcely
endure the hour or two until it was time to set forth; every minute
cost him a throb of pain. The torment must have told upon his visage,
for on entering the room where Marcella waited he saw that she looked
at him with a changing expression, as if something surprised her.

They shook hands, but without a word. Marcella pointed to a chair, yet
remained standing. She was endeavouring to smile; her eyes fell, and
she coloured.

'Don't let us make each other uncomfortable,' Peak exclaimed suddenly,
in the off-hand tone of friendly intimacy. 'There's nothing tragic in
this affair, after all. Let us talk quietly.'

Marcella seated herself.

'I had reasons,' he went on, 'for going away from my old acquaintances
for a time. Why not, if I chose? You have found me out. Very well; let
us talk it over as we have discussed many another moral or
psychological question.'

He did not meditate these sentences. Something must of necessity be
said, and words shaped themselves for him. His impulse was to avoid the
emotional, to talk with this problematic woman as with an intellectual
friend of his own sex.

'Forgive me,' were the first sounds that came from Marcella's lips. She
spoke with bent head, and almost in a whisper.

'What have I to forgive?' He sat down and leaned sideways in the easy
chair. 'You were curious about my doings? What more natural?'

'Do you know how I learnt where you were?'

She looked up for an instant.

'I have a suspicion. You went to Twybridge?'

'Yes.'

'But not in your own name?'

'I can hardly tell why not.'

Peak laughed. He was physically and mentally at rest in comparison with
his state for the past few days. Things had a simpler aspect all at
once. After all, who would wish to interfere maliciously with him?
Women like to be in secrets, and probably Marcella would preserve his.

'What conjectures had you made about me?' he asked, with an air of
amusement.

'Many, of course. But I heard something not long ago which seemed so
unlikely, yet was told so confidently, that at last I couldn't overcome
my wish to make inquiries.'

'And what was that?'

'Mr. Malkin has been to America, and he declared that he had met you in
the streets of Boston--and that you refused to admit you were yourself.'

Peak laughed still more buoyantly. His mood was eager to seize on any
point that afforded subject for jest.

'Malkin seems to have come across my Doppelganger. One mustn't pretend
to certainty in anything, but I am disposed to think I never was in
Boston.'

'He was of course mistaken.'

Marcella's voice had an indistinctness very unlike her ordinary tone.
As a rule she spoke with that clearness and decision which corresponds
to qualities of mind not commonly found in women. But confidence seemed
to have utterly deserted her; she had lost her individuality, and was
weakly feminine.

'I have been here since last Christmas,' said Godwin, after a pause.

'Yes. I know.'

Their eyes met.

'No doubt your friends have told you as much as they know of me?'

'Yes--they have spoken of you.'

'And what does it amount to?'

He regarded her steadily, with a smile of indifference.

'They say'--she gazed at him as if constrained to do so--'that you are
going into the Church.' And as soon as she uttered the last word, a
painful laugh escaped her.

'Nothing else? No comments?'

'I think Miss Moorhouse finds it difficult to understand.'

'Miss Moorhouse?' He reflected, still smiling. 'I shouldn't wonder. She
has a sceptical mind, and she doesn't know me well enough to understand
me.'

'Doesn't know you well enough?'

She repeated the words mechanically. Peak gave her a keen glance.

'Has she led you to suppose,' he asked, 'that we are on intimate terms?'

'No.' The word fell from her, absently, despondently.

'Miss Moxey, would anything be gained by our discussing my position? If
you think it a mystery, hadn't we better leave it so?'

She made no answer.

'But perhaps,' he went on, 'you have told them--the Walworths and the
Moorhouses--that I owe my friends an explanation? When I see them
again, perhaps I shall be confronted with cold, questioning faces?'

'I haven't said a word that could injure you,' Marcella replied, with
something of her usual self-possession, passing her eyes distantly over
his face as she spoke.

'I knew the suggestion was unjust, when I made it.'

'Then why should you refuse me your confidence?'

She bent forward slightly, but with her eyes cast down. Tone and
features intimated a sense of shame, due partly to the feeling that she
offered complicity in deceit.

'What can I tell you more than you know?' said Godwin, coldly. 'I
propose to become a clergyman, and I have acknowledged to you that my
motive is ambition. As the matter concerns my conscience, that must
rest with myself; I have spoken of it to no one. But you may depend
upon it that I am prepared for every difficulty that may spring up. I
knew, of course, that sooner or later some one would discover me here.
Well, I have changed my opinions, that's all; who can demand more than
that?'

Marcella answered in a tone of forced composure.

'You owe me no explanation at all. Yet we have known each other for a
long time, and it pains me that--to be suddenly told that we are no
more to each other than strangers.'

'Are we talking like strangers, Marcella?'

She flushed, and her eyes gleamed as they fixed themselves upon him for
an instant. He had never before dreamt of addressing her so familiarly,
and least of all in this moment was she prepared for it. Godwin
despised himself for the impulse to which he had yielded, but its
policy was justified. He had taken one more step in disingenuousness--a
small matter.

'Let it be one of those things on which even friends don't open their
minds to each other,' he pursued. 'I am living in solitude, and perhaps
must do so for several years yet. If I succeed in my purposes, you will
see me again on the old terms; if I fail, then too we shall be
friends--if you are willing.'

'You won't tell me what those purposes are?'

'Surely you can imagine them.'

'Will you let me ask you--do you look for help to anyone that I have
seen here?' She spoke with effort and with shame.

'To no one that you have met,' he answered, shortly.

'Then to some one in Exeter? I have been told that you have friends.'

He was irritated by her persistency, and his own inability to decide
upon the most prudent way of answering.

'You mean the Warricombe family, I suppose?'

'Yes.'

'I think it very likely that Mr. Warricombe may be able to help me
substantially.'

Marcella kept silence. Then, without raising her eyes, she murmured:

'You will tell me no more?'

'There is nothing more to tell.'

She bit her lips, as if to compel them to muteness. Her breath came
quickly; she glanced this way and that, like one who sought an escape.
After eyeing her askance for a moment, Peak rose.

'You are going?' she said.

'Yes; but surely there is no reason why we shouldn't say good-bye in a
natural and friendly way?'

'Can you forgive me for that deceit I practised?'

Peak laughed.

'What does it matter? We should in any case have met at Budleigh
Salterton.'

'No. I had no serious thought of accepting their invitation.'

She stood looking away from him, endeavouring to speak as though the
denial had but slight significance. Godwin stirred impatiently.

'I should never have gone to Twybridge,' Marcella continued, 'but for
Mr. Malkin's story.'

He turned to her.

'You mean that his story had a disagreeable sound?'

Marcella kept silence, her fingers working together.

'And is your mind relieved?' he added.

'I wish you were back in London. I wish this change had never come to
pass.'

'I wish that several things in my life had never come to pass. But I am
here, and my resolve is unalterable. One thing I must ask you--how
shall you represent my position to your brother?'

For a moment Marcella hesitated. Then, meeting his look, she answered
with nervous haste:

'I shall not mention you to him.'

Ashamed to give any sign of satisfaction, and oppressed by the feeling
that he owed her gratitude, Peak stood gazing towards the windows with
an air of half-indifferent abstractedness. It was better to let the
interview end thus, without comment or further question; so he turned
abruptly, and offered his hand.

'Good-bye. You will hear of me, or from me.'

'Good-bye!'

He tried to smile; but Marcella had a cold face, expressive of more
dignity than she had hitherto shown. As he closed the door she was
still looking towards him.

He knew what the look meant. In his position, a man of ordinary fibre
would long ago have nursed the flattering conviction that Marcella
loved him. Godwin had suspected it, but in a vague, unemotional way,
never attaching importance to the matter. What he _had_ clearly
understood was, that Christian wished to inspire him with interest in
Marcella, and on that account, when in her company, he sometimes set
himself to display a deliberate negligence. No difficult undertaking,
for he was distinctly repelled by the thought of any relations with her
more intimate than had been brought about by his cold intellectual
sympathy. Her person was still as disagreeable to him as when he first
met her in her uncle's house at Twybridge. If a man sincerely hopes
that a woman does not love him (which can seldom be the case where a
suggestion of such feeling ever arises), he will find it easy to
believe that she does not. Peak not only had the benefit of this
principle; the constitution of his mind made it the opposite of natural
for him to credit himself with having inspired affection. That his male
friends held him in any warm esteem always appeared to him improbable,
and as regards women his modesty was profound. The simplest
explanation, that he was himself incapable of pure devotedness, perhaps
hits the truth. Unsympathetic, however, he could with no justice be
called, and now that the reality of Marcella's love was forced upon his
consciousness he thought of her with sincere pity,--the emotion which
had already possessed him (though he did not then analyse it) when he
unsuspectingly looked into her troubled face a few days ago.

It was so hard to believe, that, on reaching home, he sat for a long
time occupied with the thought of it, to the exclusion of his own
anxieties. What! this woman had made of _him_ an ideal such as he
himself sought among the most exquisite of her sex? How was that
possible? What quality of his, personal, psychical, had such magnetic
force? What sort of being was he in Marcella's eyes? Reflective men
must often enough marvel at the success of whiskered and trousered
mortals in wooing the women of their desire, for only by a specific
imagination can a person of one sex assume the emotions of the other.
Godwin had neither that endowment nor the peculiar self-esteem which
makes love-winning a matter of course to some intelligent males. His
native arrogance signified a low estimate of mankind at large, rather
than an overweening appreciation of his own qualities, and in his most
presumptuous moments he had never claimed the sexual refulgence which
many a commonplace fellow so gloriously exhibits. At most, he had hoped
that some woman might find him _interesting_, and so be led on to like
him well enough for the venture of matrimony. Passion at length
constrained him to believe that his ardour might be genuinely
reciprocated, but even now it was only in paroxysms that he held this
assurance; the hours of ordinary life still exposed him to the familiar
self-criticism, sometimes more scathing than ever. He dreaded the
looking-glass, consciously avoided it; and a like disparagement of his
inner being tortured him through the endless labyrinths of erotic
reverie.

Yet here was a woman who so loved him that not even a proud temper and
his candid indifference could impose restraint upon her emotions. As he
listened to the most significant of her words he was distressed with
shame, and now, in recalling them, he felt that he should have said
something, done something, to disillusion her. Could he not easily show
himself in a contemptible light? But reflection taught him that the
shame he had experienced on Marcella's behalf was blended with a
gratification which forbade him at the moment to be altogether
unamiable. It was not self-interest alone that prompted his use of her
familiar name. In the secret places of his heart he was thankful to her
for a most effective encouragement. She had confirmed him in the hope
that he was loved by Sidwell.

And now that he no longer feared her, Marcella was gradually dismissed
from mind. For a day or two he avoided the main streets of the town,
lest a chance meeting with her should revive disquietude; but, by the
time that Mrs. Warricombe's invitation permitted him once more to
follow his desire, he felt assured that Marcella was back in London,
and the sense of distance helped to banish her among unrealities.

The hours had never pressed upon him with such demand for resolution.
In the look with which Sidwell greeted him when he met her in the
drawing-room, he seemed to read much more than wonted friendliness; it
was as though a half secret already existed between them. But no
occasion offered for a word other than trivial. The dinner-party
consisted of about a score of people, and throughout the evening Peak
found himself hopelessly severed from the one person whose presence was
anything but an importunity to him. He maddened with jealousy, with
fear, with ceaseless mental manoeuvring. More than one young man of
agreeable aspect appeared to be on dangerous terms with Sidwell,
approaching her with that air of easy, well-bred intimacy which Godwin
knew too well he would never be able to assume in perfection. Again he
was humiliated by self-comparison with social superiors, and again
reminded that in this circle he had a place merely on sufferance. Mrs.
Warricombe, when he chanced to speak with her, betrayed the slight
regard in which she really held him, and Martin devoted himself to more
important people. The evening was worse than lost.

Yet in two more days Sidwell would be beyond reach. He writhed upon his
bed as the image of her loveliness returned again and again,--her face
as she conversed at table, her dignity as she rose with the other
ladies, her smile when he said good-night. A smile that meant more than
civility; he was convinced of it. But memory would not support him
through half-a-year of solitude and ill-divining passion.

He would write to her, and risk all. Two o'clock in the morning saw him
sitting half-dressed at the table, raging over the difficulties of a
composition which should express his highest self. Four o'clock saw the
blotched letter torn into fragments. He could not write as he wished,
could not hit the tone of manly appeal. At five o'clock he turned
wretchedly into bed again.

A day of racking headache; then the long restful sleep which brings
good counsel. It was well that he had not sent a letter, nor in any
other way committed himself. If Sidwell were ever to be his wife, the
end could only be won by heroic caution and patience. Thus far he had
achieved notable results; to rush upon his aim would be the most absurd
departure from a hopeful scheme gravely devised and pursued. To wait,
to establish himself in the confidence of this family, to make sure his
progress step by step, that was the course indicated from the first by
his calm reason. Other men might triumph by sudden audacity; for him
was no hope save in slow, persevering energy of will. Passion had all
but ruined him; now he had recovered self-control.

Sidwell's six months in London might banish him from her mind, might
substitute some rival against whom it would be hopeless to contend.
Yes; but a thousand possibilities stood with menace in the front of
every great enterprise. Before next spring he might be dead.

Defiance, then, of every foreboding, of every shame; and a life that
moulded itself in the ardour of unchangeable resolve.