CHAPTER II


In different ways, Christian and Marcella Moxey had both been lonely
since their childhood. As a schoolgirl, Marcella seemed to her
companions conceited and repellent; only as the result of reflection in
after years did Sylvia Moorhouse express so favourable an opinion of
her. In all things she affected singularity; especially it was her
delight to utter democratic and revolutionary sentiments among hearers
who, belonging to a rigidly conservative order, held such opinions
impious. Arrived at womanhood, she affected scorn of the beliefs and
habits cherished by her own sex, and shrank from association with the
other. Godwin Peak was the first man with whom she conversed in the
tone of friendship, and it took a year or more before that point was
reached. As her intimacy with him established itself, she was observed
to undergo changes which seemed very significant in the eyes of her few
acquaintances. Disregard of costume had been one of her
characteristics, but now she moved gradually towards the opposite
extreme, till her dresses were occasionally more noticeable for
richness than for good taste.

Christian, for kindred reasons, was equally debarred from the pleasures
and profits of society. At school, his teachers considered him clever,
his fellows for the most part looked down upon him as a sentimental
weakling. The death of his parents, when he was still a lad, left him
to the indifferent care of a guardian nothing akin to him. He began
life in an uncongenial position, and had not courage to oppose the
drift of circumstances. The romantic attachment which absorbed his best
years naturally had a debilitating effect, for love was never yet a
supporter of the strenuous virtues, save when it has survived fruition
and been blessed by reason. In most men a fit of amorous mooning works
its own cure; energetic rebound is soon inevitable. But Christian was
so constituted that a decade of years could not exhaust his capacity
for sentimental languishment. He made it a point of honour to seek no
female companionship which could imperil his faith. Unfortunately, this
avoidance of the society which would soon have made him a happy
renegade, was but too easy. Marcella and he practically encouraged each
other in a life of isolation, though to both of them such an existence
was anything but congenial. Their difficulties were of the same nature
as those which had always beset Godwin Peak; they had no relatives with
whom they cared to associate, and none of the domestic friends who, in
the progress of time, establish and extend a sphere of genuine intimacy.

Most people who are capable of independent thought rapidly outgrow the
stage when compromise is abhorred; they accept, at first reluctantly,
but ere long with satisfaction, that code of polite intercourse which,
as Steele says, is 'an expedient to make fools and wise men equal'. It
was Marcella's ill-fate that she could neither learn tolerance nor
persuade herself to affect it. The emancipated woman has fewer
opportunities of relieving her mind than a man in corresponding
position; if her temper be aggressive she must renounce general
society, and, if not content to live alone, ally herself with some
group of declared militants. By correspondence, or otherwise, Marcella
might have brought herself into connection with women of a sympathetic
type, but this effort she had never made. And chiefly because of her
acquaintance with Godwin Peak. In him she concentrated her interests;
he was the man to whom her heart went forth with every kind of fervour.
So long as there remained a hope of moving him to reciprocal feeling
she did not care to go in search of female companions. Year after year
she sustained herself in solitude by this faint hope. She had lost
sight of the two or three schoolfellows who, though not so zealous as
herself, would have welcomed her as an interesting acquaintance; and
the only woman who assiduously sought her was Mrs. Morton, the wife of
one of Christian's friends, a good-natured but silly person bent on
making known that she followed the 'higher law'.

Godwin's disappearance sank her in profound melancholy. Through the
black weeks of January and February she scarcely left the house, and on
the plea of illness refused to see any one but her brother. Between
Christian and her there was no avowed confidence, but each knew the
other's secret; their mutual affection never spoke itself in words, yet
none the less it was indispensable to their lives. Deprived of his
sister's company, Christian must have yielded to the vice which had
already too strong a hold upon him, and have become a maudlin drunkard.
Left to herself, Marcella had but slender support against a grim
temptation already beckoning her in nights of sleeplessness. Of the
two, her nature was the more tragic. Circumstances aiding, Christian
might still forget his melancholy, abandon the whisky bottle, and pass
a lifetime of amiable uxoriousness, varied with scientific enthusiasm.
But for Marcella, frustrate in the desire with which every impulse of
her being had identified itself, what future could be imagined?

When a day or two of sunlight (the rays through a semi-opaque
atmosphere which London has to accept with gratitude) had announced
that the seven-months' winter was overcome, and when the newspapers
began to speak, after their fashion, of pictures awaiting scrutiny,
Christian exerted himself to rouse his sister from her growing
indolence. He succeeded in taking her to the Academy. Among the works
of sculpture, set apart for the indifference of the public, was a
female head, catalogued as 'A Nihilist'--in itself interesting, and
specially so to Marcella, because it was executed by an artist whose
name she recognised as that of a schoolmate, Agatha Walworth. She spoke
of the circumstance to Christian, and added:

'I should like to have that. Let us go and see the price.'

The work was already sold. Christian, happy that his sister could be
aroused to this interest, suggested that a cast might be obtainable.

'Write to Miss Walworth,' he urged. 'Bring yourself to her
recollection.--I should think she must be the right kind of woman.'

Though at the time she shook her head, Marcella was presently tempted
to address a letter to the artist, who responded with friendly
invitation. In this way a new house was opened to her; but,
simultaneously, one more illusion was destroyed. Knowing little of
life, and much of literature, she pictured Miss Walworth as inhabiting
a delightful Bohemian world, where the rules of conventionalism had no
existence, and everything was judged by the brain-standard. Modern
French biographies supplied all her ideas of studio society. She
prepared herself for the first visit with a joyous tremor, wondering
whether she would be deemed worthy to associate with the men and women
who lived for art. The reality was a shock. In a large house at
Chiswick she found a gathering of most respectable English people,
chatting over the regulation tea-cup; not one of them inclined to
disregard the dictates of Mrs. Grundy in dress, demeanour, or dialogue.
Agatha Walworth lived with her parents and her sisters like any other
irreproachable young woman. She had a nice little studio, and worked at
modelling with a good deal of aptitude; but of Bohemia she knew nothing
whatever, save by hearsay. Her 'Nihilist' was no indication of a
rebellious spirit; some friend had happened to suggest that a certain
female model, a Russian, would do very well for such a character, and
the hint was tolerably well carried out--nothing more. Marcella
returned in a mood of contemptuous disappointment. The cast she had
desired to have was shortly sent to her as a gift, but she could take
no pleasure in it.

Still, she saw more of the Walworths and found them not illiberal.
Agatha was intelligent, and fairly well read in modern authors; no need
to conceal one's opinions in conversation with her. Marcella happened
to be spending the evening with these acquaintances whilst her brother
was having his chat at Staple Inn; on her return, she mentioned to
Christian that she had been invited to visit the Walworths in
Devonshire a few weeks hence.

'Go, by all means,' urged her brother.

'I don't think I shall. They are too respectable.'

'Nonsense! They seem very open-minded; you really can't expect absolute
unconventionality. Is it desirable? Really is it, now?--Suppose I were
to marry some day, Marcella; do you think my household would be
unconventional?'

His voice shook a little, and he kept his eyes averted. Marcella, to
whom her brother's romance was anything but an agreeable subject,--the
slight acquaintance she had with the modern Laura did not encourage her
to hope for that lady's widowhood,--gave no heed to the question.

'They are going to have a house at Budleigh Salterton; do you know of
the place? Somewhere near the mouth of the Exe. Miss Walworth tells me
that one of our old school friends is living there--Sylvia Moorhouse.
Did I ever mention Sylvia? She had gleams of sense, I remember; but no
doubt society has drilled all that out of her.'

Christian sighed.

'Why?' he urged. 'Society is getting more tolerant than you are
disposed to think. Very few well-educated people would nowadays object
to an acquaintance on speculative grounds. Some one--who was it?--was
telling me of a recent marriage between the daughter of some well-known
Church people and a man who made no secret of his agnosticism; the
parents acquiescing cheerfully. The one thing still insisted on is
decency of behaviour.'

Marcella's eyes flashed.

'How can you say that? You know quite well that most kinds of
immorality are far more readily forgiven by people of the world than
sincere heterodoxy on moral subjects.'

'Well, well, I meant decency from _their_ point of view. And there
really must be such restrictions, you know. How very few people are
capable of what you call sincere heterodoxy, in morals or religion!
Your position is unphilosophical; indeed it is. Take the world as you
find it, and make friends with kind, worthy people. You have suffered
from a needless isolation. Do accept this opportunity of adding to your
acquaintances!--Do, Marcella! I shall take it as a great kindness, dear
girl.'

His sister let her head lie back against the chair, her face averted. A
stranger seated in Christian's place, regarding Marcella whilst her
features were thus hidden, would have thought it probable that she was
a woman of no little beauty. Her masses of tawny hair, her arms and
hands, the pose and outline of her figure, certainly suggested a
countenance of corresponding charm, and the ornate richness of her
attire aided such an impression. This thought came to Christian as he
gazed at her; his eyes, always so gentle, softened to a tender
compassion. As the silence continued, he looked uneasily about him;
when at length he spoke, it was as though a matter of trifling moment
had occurred to him.

'By-the-bye, I am told that Malkin (Earwaker's friend, you know) saw
Peak not long ago--in America.'

Marcella did not change her position, but at the sound of Peak's name
she stirred, as if with an intention, at once checked, of bending
eagerly forward.

'In America?' she asked, incredulously.

'At Boston. He met him in the street--or thinks he did. There's a
doubt. When Malkin spoke to the man, he declared that he was not Peak
at all--said there was a mistake.'

Marcella moved so as to show her face; endeavouring to express an
unemotional interest, she looked coldly scornful.

'That ridiculous man can't be depended upon,' she said.

There had been one meeting between Marcella and Mr. Malkin, with the
result that each thoroughly disliked the other--an antipathy which
could have been foreseen.

'Well, there's no saying,' replied Christian. 'But of one thing I feel
pretty sure: we have seen the last of Peak. He'll never come back to
us.'

'Why not?'

'I can only say that I feel convinced he has broken finally with all
his old friends.--We must think no more of him, Marcella.'

His sister rose slowly, affected to glance at a book, and in a few
moments said good-night. For another hour Christian sat by himself in
gloomy thought.

At breakfast next morning Marcella announced that she would be from
home the whole day; she might return in time for dinner, but it was
uncertain. Her brother asked no questions, but said that he would lunch
in town. About ten o'clock a cab was summoned, and Marcella, without
leave-taking, drove away.

Christian lingered as long as possible over the morning paper, unable
to determine how he should waste the weary hours that lay before him.
There was no reason for his remaining in London through this brief
season of summer glow. Means and leisure were his, he could go whither
he would. But the effort of decision and departure seemed too much for
him. Worst of all, this lassitude (not for the first time) was
affecting his imagination; he thought with a dull discontent of the
ideal love to which he had bound himself. Could he but escape from it,
and begin a new life! But he was the slave of his airy obligation; for
very shame's sake his ten years' consistency must be that of a lifetime.

There was but one place away from London to which he felt himself
drawn, and that was the one place he might not visit. This morning's
sunshine carried him back to that day when he had lain in the meadow
near Twybridge and talked with Godwin Peak. How distinctly he
remembered his mood! 'Be practical--don't be led astray after
ideals--concentrate yourself;'--yes, it was he who had given that
advice to Peak: and had he but recked his own rede--! Poor little
Janet! was she married? If so, her husband must be a happy man.

Why should he not go down to Twybridge? His uncle, undoubtedly still
living, must by this time have forgotten the old resentment, perhaps
would be glad to see him. In any case he might stroll about the town
and somehow obtain news of the Moxey family.

With vague half-purpose he left the house and walked westward. The
stream of traffic in Edgware Road brought him to a pause; he stood for
five minutes in miserable indecision, all but resolving to go on as far
as Euston and look for the next northward train. But the vice in his
will prevailed; automaton-like he turned in another direction, and
presently came out into Sussex Square. Here was the house to which his
thoughts had perpetually gone forth ever since that day when Constance
gave her hand to a thriving City man, and became Mrs. Palmer. At
present, he knew, it was inhabited only by domestics: Mr. Palmer,
recovering from illness that threatened to be fatal, had gone to
Bournemouth, where Constance of course tended him. But he would walk
past and look up at the windows.

All the blinds were down--naturally. Thrice he went by and retraced his
steps. Then, still automaton-like, he approached the door, rang the
bell. The appearance of the servant choked his voice for an instant,
but he succeeded in shaping an inquiry after Mr. Palmer's health.

'I'm sorry to say, sir,' was the reply, 'that Mr. Palmer died last
night. We received the news only an hour or two ago.'

Christian tottered on his feet and turned so pale that the servant
regarded him with anxiety. For a minute or two he stared vacantly into
the gloomy hall; then, without a word, he turned abruptly and walked
away.

Unconscious of the intervening distance, he found himself at home, in
his library. The parlour-maid was asking him whether he would have
luncheon. Scarcely understanding the question, he muttered a refusal
and sat down.

So, it had come at last. Constance was a widow. In a year or so she
might think of marrying again.

He remained in the library for three or four hours. At first incapable
of rejoicing, then ashamed to do so, he at length suffered from such a
throbbing of the heart that apprehension of illness recalled him to a
normal state of mind. The favourite decanter was within reach, and it
gave him the wonted support. Then at length did heart and brain glow
with exulting fervour.

Poor Constance! Noble woman! Most patient of martyrs! The hour of her
redemption had struck. The fetters had fallen from her tender,
suffering body. Of _him_ she could not yet think. He did not wish it.
The womanhood must pay its debt to nature before she could gladden in
the prospect of a new life. Months must go by before he could approach
her, or even remind her of his existence. But at last his reward was
sure.

And he had thought of Twybridge, of his cousin Janet! O unworthy lapse!

He shed tears of tenderness. Dear, noble Constance! It was now nearly
twelve years since he first looked upon her face. In those days he
mingled freely with all the society within his reach. It was not very
select, and Constance Markham shone to him like a divinity among
creatures of indifferent clay. They said she was coquettish, that she
played at the game of love with every presentable young man--envious
calumny! No, she was single-hearted, inexperienced, a lovely and joyous
girl of not yet twenty. It is so difficult for such a girl to
understand her own emotions. Her parents persuaded her into wedding
Palmer. That was all gone into the past, and now his concern--their
concern--was only with the blessed future.

At three o'clock he began to feel a healthy appetite. He sent for a cab
and drove towards the region of restaurants.

Had he yielded to the impulse which this morning directed him to
Twybridge, he would have arrived in that town not very long after his
sister.

For that was the aim of Marcella's journey. On reaching the station,
she dropped a light veil over her face and set forth on foot to
discover the abode of Mrs. Peak. No inhabitant of Twybridge save her
uncle and his daughters could possibly recognise her, but she shrank
from walking through the streets with exposed countenance. Whether she
would succeed in her quest was uncertain. Godwin Peak's mother still
dwelt here, she knew, for less than a year ago she had asked the
question of Godwin himself; but a woman in humble circumstances might
not have a house of her own, and her name was probably unknown save to
a few friends.

However, the first natural step was to inquire for a directory. A
stationer supplied her with one, informing her, with pride, that he
himself was the author of it--that this was only the second year of its
issue, and that its success was 'very encouraging'. Retiring to a quiet
street, Marcella examined her purchase, and came upon 'Peak, Oliver;
seedsman'--the sole entry of the name. This was probably a relative of
Godwin's. Without difficulty she found Mr Peak's shop; behind the
counter stood Oliver himself, rubbing his hands. Was there indeed a
family likeness between this fresh-looking young shopkeeper and the
stern, ambitious, intellectual man whose lineaments were ever before
her mind? Though with fear and repulsion, Marcella was constrained to
recognise something in the commonplace visage. With an uncertain voice,
she made known her business.

'I wish to find Mrs. Peak--a widow--an elderly lady'----

'Oh yes, madam! My mother, no doubt. She lives with her sister, Miss
Cadman--the milliner's shop in the first street to the left. Let me
point it out.'

With a sinking of the heart, Marcella murmured thanks and walked away.
She found the milliner's shop--and went past it.

Why should discoveries such as these be so distasteful to her? Her own
origin was not so exalted that she must needs look down on trades-folk.
Still, for the moment she all but abandoned her undertaking. Was Godwin
Peak in truth of so much account to her? Would not the shock of meeting
his mother be final? Having come thus far, she must go through with it.
If the experience cured her of a hopeless passion, why, what more
desirable?

She entered the shop. A young female assistant came forward with
respectful smile, and waited her commands.

'I wish, if you please, to see Mrs. Peak.'

'Oh yes, madam! Will you have the goodness to walk this way?'

Too late Marcella remembered that she ought to have gone to the
house-entrance. The girl led her out of the shop into a dark passage,
and thence into a sitting-room which smelt of lavender. Here she waited
for a few moments; then the door opened softly, and Mrs. Peak presented
herself.

There was no shock. The widow had the air of a gentlewoman--walked with
elderly grace--and spoke with propriety. She resembled Godwin, and this
time it was not painful to remark the likeness.

'I have come to Twybridge,' began Marcella, gently and respectfully,
'that is to say, I have stopped in passing--to ask for the address of
Mr. Godwin Peak. A letter has failed to reach him.

It was her wish to manage without either disclosing the truth about
herself or elaborating fictions, but after the first words she felt it
impossible not to offer some explanation. Mrs. Peak showed a slight
surprise. With the courage of cowardice, Marcella continued more
rapidly:

'My name is Mrs. Ward. My husband used to know Mr. Peak, in London, a
few years ago, but we have been abroad, and unfortunately have lost
sight of him. We remembered that Mr. Peak's relatives lived at
Twybridge, and, as we wish very much to renew the old acquaintance, I
took the opportunity--passing by rail. I made inquiries in the town,
and was directed to you--I hope rightly'----

The widow's face changed to satisfaction. Evidently her straightforward
mind accepted the story as perfectly credible. Marcella, with
bitterness, knew herself far from comely enough to suggest perils. She
looked old enough for the part she was playing, and the glove upon her
hand might conceal a wedding-ring.

'Yes, you were directed rightly,' Mrs. Peak made quiet answer. 'I shall
be very glad to give you my son's address. He left London about last
Christmas, and went to live at Exeter.'

'Exeter? We thought he might be out of England.'

'No; he has lived all the time at Exeter. The address is Longbrook
Street'--she added the number. 'He is studying, and finds that part of
the country pleasant. I am hoping to see him here before very long.'

Marcella did not extend the conversation. She spoke of having to catch
a train, and veiled as well as she could beneath ordinary courtesies
her perplexity at the information she had received.

When she again reached the house at Notting Hill, Christian was absent.
He came home about nine in the evening. It was impossible not to remark
his strange mood of repressed excitement; but Marcella did not question
him, and Christian had resolved to conceal the day's event until he
could speak of it without agitation. Before they parted for the night,
Marcella said carelessly:

'I have decided to go down to Budleigh Salterton when the time comes.'

'That's right!' exclaimed her brother, with satisfaction. 'You couldn't
do better--couldn't possibly. It will be a very good thing for you in
several ways.'

And each withdrew to brood over a perturbing secret.