CHAPTER V


In volunteering a promise not to inform her brother of Peak's singular
position, Marcella spoke with sincerity. She was prompted by
incongruous feelings--a desire to compel Godwin's gratitude, and
disdain of the circumstances in which she had discovered him. There
seemed to be little likelihood of Christian's learning from any other
person that she had met with Peak at Budleigh Salterton; he had,
indeed, dined with her at the Walworths', and might improve his
acquaintance with that family, but it was improbable that they would
ever mention in his hearing the stranger who had casually been
presented to them, or indeed ever again think of him. If she held her
peace, the secret of Godwin's retirement must still remain
impenetrable. He would pursue his ends as hitherto, thinking of _her_,
if at all, as a weak woman who had immodestly betrayed a hopeless
passion, and who could be trusted never to wish him harm.

That was Marcella's way of reading a man's thoughts. She did not
attribute to Peak the penetration which would make him uneasy. In spite
of masculine proverbs, it is the habit of women to suppose that the
other sex regards them confidingly, ingenuously. Marcella was unusually
endowed with analytic intelligence, but in this case she believed what
she hoped. She knew that Peak's confidence in her must be coloured with
contempt, but this mattered little so long as he paid her the
compliment of feeling sure that she was superior to ignoble
temptations. Many a woman would behave with treacherous malice. It was
in her power to expose him, to confound all his schemes, for she knew
the authorship of that remarkable paper in _The Critical Review_.
Before receiving Peak's injunction of secrecy, Earwaker had talked of
'The New Sophistry' with Moxey and with Malkin; the request came too
late. In her interview with Godwin at the Exeter hotel, she had not
even hinted at this knowledge, partly because she was unconscious that
Peak imagined the affair a secret between himself and Earwaker, partly
because she thought it unworthy of her even to seem to threaten. It
gratified her, however, to feel that he was at her mercy, and the
thought preoccupied her for many days.

Passion which has the intellect on its side is more easily endured than
that which offers sensual defiance to all reasoning, but on the other
hand it lasts much longer. Marcella was not consumed by her emotions;
she often thought calmly, coldly, of the man she loved. Yet he was
seldom long out of her mind, and the instigation of circumstances at
times made her suffering intense. Such an occasion was her first
meeting with Sidwell Warricombe, which took place at the Walworths', in
London. Down in Devonshire she had learnt that a family named
Warricombe were Peak's intimate friends; nothing more than this, for
indeed no one was in a position to tell her more. Wakeful jealousy
caused her to fix upon the fact as one of significance; Godwin's
evasive manner when she questioned him confirmed her suspicions; and as
soon as she was brought face to face with Sidwell, suspicion became
certainty. She knew at once that Miss Warricombe was the very person
who would be supremely attractive to Godwin Peak.

An interval of weeks, and again she saw the face that in the meantime
had been as present to her imagination as Godwin's own features. This
time she conversed at some length with Miss Warricombe. Was it merely a
fancy that the beautiful woman looked at her, spoke to her, with some
exceptional interest? By now she had learnt that the Moorhouses and the
Warricombes were connected in close friendship: it was all but certain,
then, that Miss Moorhouse had told Miss Warricombe of Peak's visit to
Budleigh Salterton, and its incidents. Could this in any way be
explanatory of the steady, searching look in those soft eyes?

Marcella had always regarded the emotion of jealousy as characteristic
of a vulgar nature. Now that it possessed her, she endeavoured to call
it by other names; to persuade herself that she was indignant on
abstract grounds, or anxious only with reference to Peak's true
interests. She could not affect surprise. So intensely sympathetic was
her reading of Godwin's character that she understood--or at all events
recognised--the power Sidwell would possess over him. He did not care
for enlightenment in a woman; he was sensual--though in a subtle way;
the aristocratic vein in his temper made him subject to strong
impressions from trivialities of personal demeanour, of social tone.

Yet all was mere conjecture. She had not dared to utter Peak's name,
lest in doing so she should betray herself. Constantly planning to make
further discoveries, she as constantly tried to dismiss all thought of
the matter--to learn indifference. Already she had debased herself, and
her nature must be contemptible indeed if anything could lure her
forward on such a path.

None the less, she was assiduous in maintaining friendly relations with
the Walworths. Christian, too, had got into the habit of calling there;
it was significant of the noticeable change which was come upon him--a
change his sister was at no loss to understand from the moment that he
informed her (gravely, but without expressiveness) of Mr. Palmer's
death. Instead of shunning ordinary society, he seemed bent on
extending the circle of his acquaintance. He urged Marcella to invite
friendly calls, to have guests at dinner. There seemed to be a general
revival of his energies, exhibited in the sphere of study as well as of
amusement. Not a day went by without his purchasing books or scientific
apparatus, and the house was brightened with works of art chosen in the
studios which Miss Walworth advised him to visit. All the amiabilities
of his character came into free play; with Marcella he was mirthful,
affectionate, even caressing. He grew scrupulous about his neckties,
his gloves, and was careful to guard his fingers against corroding
acids when he worked in the laboratory. Such indications of hopefulness
caused Marcella more misgiving than pleasure; she made no remark, but
waited with anxiety for some light on the course of events.

Just before dinner, one evening, as she sat alone in the drawing-room,
Christian entered with a look which portended some strange
announcement. He spoke abruptly:

'I have heard something astonishing.'

'What is that?'

'This afternoon I went to the matinee at the Vaudeville, and found
myself among a lot of our friends--the Walworths and the Hunters and
the Mortons. Between the acts I was talking to Hunter, when a man came
up to us, spoke to Hunter, and was introduced to me--a Mr Warricombe.
What do you think he said? "I believe you know my friend Peak, Mr.
Moxey?" "Peak? To be sure! Can you tell me what has become of him?" He
gave me an odd look. "Why, I met him last, some two months ago, in
Devonshire." At that moment we were obliged to go to our places, and I
couldn't get hold of the fellow again. Hunter told me something about
him; he knows the Walworths, it seems--belongs to a good Devonshire
family. What on earth can Peak be doing over there?'

Marcella kept silence. The event she had judged improbable had come to
pass. The chance of its doing so had of course increased since
Christian began to associate freely with the Walworths and their
circle. Yet, considering the slightness of the connection between that
group of people and the Warricombe family, there had seemed no great
likelihood of Christian's getting acquainted with the latter. She
debated rapidly in her troubled mind how to meet this disclosure.
Curiosity would, of course, impel her brother to follow up the clue; he
would again encounter Warricombe, and must then learn all the facts of
Peak's position. To what purpose should she dissemble her own knowledge?

Did she desire that Godwin should remain in security? A tremor more
akin to gladness than its opposite impeded her utterance. If Warricombe
became aware of all that was involved in Godwin Peak's withdrawal from
among his friends--if (as must follow) he imparted the discovery to his
sister----

The necessity of speaking enabled her to ignore these turbulent
speculations, which yet were anything but new to her.

'They met at Budleigh Salterton,' she said, quietly.

'Who did? Warricombe and Peak?'

'Yes. At the Moorhouses'. It was when I was there.'

Christian stared at her.

'When you were there? But--_you_ met Peak?'

His sister smiled, turning from the astonished gaze.

'Yes, I met him.'

'But, why the deuce----? Why didn't you tell me, Marcella?'

'He asked me not to speak of it. He didn't wish you to know that--that
he has decided to become a clergyman.'

Christian was stricken dumb. In spite of his sister's obvious
agitation, he could not believe what she told him; her smile gave him
an excuse for supposing that she jested.

'Peak a clergyman?' He burst out laughing. 'What's the meaning of all
this?--Do speak intelligibly! What's the fellow up to?'

'I am quite serious. He is studying for Orders--has been for this last
year.'

In desperation, Christian turned to another phase of the subject.

'Then Malkin _was_ mistaken?'

'Plainly.'

'And you mean to tell me that Peak----? Give me more details. Where's
he living? How has he got to know people like these Warricombes?'

Marcella told all that she knew, and without injunction of secrecy. The
affair had passed out of her hands; destiny must fulfil itself. And
again the tremor that resembled an uneasy joy went through her frame.

'But how,' asked Christian, 'did this fellow Warricombe come to know
that _I_ was a friend of Peak's?'

'That's a puzzle to me. I shouldn't have thought he would have
remembered my name; and, even if he had, how could he conclude----'

She broke off, pondering. Warricombe must have made inquiries, possibly
suggested by suspicions.

'I scarcely spoke of Mr. Peak to anyone,' she added. 'People saw, of
course, that we were acquaintances, but it couldn't have seemed a thing
of any importance.'

'You spoke with him in private, it seems?'

'Yes, I saw him for a few minutes--in Exeter.'

'And you hadn't said anything to the Walworths that--that would
surprise them?'

'Purposely not.--Why should I injure him?'

Christian knit his brows. He understood too well why his sister should
refrain from such injury.

'You would have behaved in the same way,' Marcella added.

'Why really--yes, perhaps so. Yet I don't know.--In plain English, Peak
is a wolf in sheep's clothing!'

'I don't know anything about that,' she replied, with gloomy evasion.

'Nonsense, my dear girl!--Had he the impudence to pretend to you that
he was sincere?'

'He made no declaration.'

'But you are convinced he is acting the hypocrite, Marcella. You spoke
of the risk of injuring him.--What are his motives? What does he aim
at?'

'Scarcely a bishopric, I should think,' she replied, bitterly.

'Then, by Jove! Earwaker may be right!'

Marcella darted an inquiring look at him.

'What has he thought?'

'I'm ashamed to speak of it. He suggested once that Peak might disguise
himself for the sake of--of making a good marriage.'

The reply was a nervous laugh.

'Look here, Marcella.' He caught her hand. 'This is a very awkward
business. Peak is disgracing himself; he will be unmasked; there'll be
a scandal. It was kind of you to keep silence--when don't you behave
kindly, dear girl?--but think of the possible results to _us_. We shall
be something very like accomplices.'

'How?' Marcella exclaimed, impatiently. 'Who need know that we were so
intimate with him?'

'Warricombe seems to know it.'

'Who can prove that he isn't sincere?'

'No one, perhaps. But it will seem a very odd thing that he hid away
from all his old friends. You remember, I betrayed that to Warricombe,
before I knew that it mattered.'

Yes, and Mr. Warricombe could hardly forget the circumstance. He would
press his investigation--knowing already, perhaps, of Peak's approaches
to his sister Sidwell.

'Marcella, a man plays games like that at his own peril. I don't like
this kind of thing. Perhaps he has audacity enough to face out any
disclosure. But it's out of the question for you and me to nurse his
secret. We have no right to do so.'

'You propose to denounce him?'

Marcella gazed at her brother with an agitated look.

'Not denounce. I am fond of Peak; I wish him well. But I can't join him
in a dishonourable plot.--Then, we mustn't endanger our place in
society.'

'I have no place in society,' Marcella answered, coldly.

'Don't say that, and don't think it. We are both going to make more of
our lives; we are going to think very little of the past, and a great
deal of the future. We are still young; we have happiness before us.'

'We?' she asked, with shaken voice.

'Yes--both of us! Who can say'----

Again he took her hand and pressed it warmly in both his own. Just then
the door opened, and dinner was announced. Christian talked on, in low
hurried tones, for several minutes, affectionately, encouragingly.
After dinner, he wished to resume the subject, but Marcella declared
that there was no more to be said; he must act as honour and discretion
bade him; for herself, she should simply keep silence as hitherto. And
she left him to his reflections.

Though with so little of ascertained fact to guide her, Marcella
interpreted the hints afforded by her slight knowledge of the
Warricombes with singular accuracy. Precisely as she had imagined,
Buckland Warricombe was going about on Peak's track, learning all he
could concerning the theological student, forming acquaintance with
anyone likely to supplement his discoveries. And less than a fortnight
after the meeting at the theatre, Christian made known to his sister
that Warricombe and he had had a second conversation, this time
uninterrupted.

'He inquired after you, Marcella, and--really I had no choice but to
ask him to call here. I hardly think he'll come. He's not the kind of
man I care for--though liberal enough, and all that.'

'Wasn't it rather rash to give that invitation?'

'The fact was, I so dreaded the appearance of--of seeming to avoid
him,' Christian pleaded, awkwardly. 'You know, that affair--we won't
talk any more of it; but, if there _should_ be a row about it, you are
sure to be compromised unless we have managed to guard ourselves. If
Warricombe calls, we must talk about Peak without the least show of
restraint. Let it appear that we thought his choice of a profession
unlikely, but not impossible. Happily, we needn't know anything about
that anonymous _Critical_ article.--Indeed, I think I have acted
wisely.'

Marcella murmured:

'Yes, I suppose you have.'

'And, by the way, I have spoken of it to Earwaker. Not of your part in
the story, of course. I told him that I had met a man who knew all
about Peak.--Impossible, you see, for me to keep silence with so
intimate a friend.'

'Then Mr. Earwaker will write to him?' said Marcella, reflectively.

'I couldn't give him any address.'

'How does Mr. Warricombe seem to regard Mr. Peak?'

'With a good deal of interest, and of the friendliest kind. Naturally
enough; they were College friends, as you know, before I had heard of
Peak's existence.'

'He has no suspicions?'

Christian thought not, but her brother's judgment had not much weight
with Marcella.

She at once dreaded and desired Warricombe's appearance. If he thought
it worth while to cultivate her acquaintance, she would henceforth have
the opportunity of studying Peak's relations with the Warricombes; on
the other hand, this was to expose herself to suffering and temptation
from which the better part of her nature shrank with disdain. That she
might seem to have broken the promise voluntarily made to Godwin was a
small matter; not so the risk of being overcome by an ignoble jealousy.
She had no overweening confidence in the steadfastness of her
self-respect, if circumstances were all on the side of sensual impulse.
And the longer she brooded on this peril, the more it allured her. For
therewith was connected the one satisfaction which still remained to
her: however little he desired to keep her constantly in mind, Godwin
Peak must of necessity do so after what had passed between them. Had
but her discovery remained her own secret, then the pleasure of
commanding her less pure emotions, of proving to Godwin that she was
above the weakness of common women, might easily have prevailed. Now
that her knowledge was shared by others, she had lost that safeguard
against lower motive. The argument that to unmask hypocrisy was in
itself laudable she dismissed with contempt; let that be the resource
of a woman who would indulge her rancour whilst keeping up the inward
pretence of sanctity. If _she_ erred in the ways characteristic of her
sex, it should at all events be a conscious degradation.

'Have you seen that odd creature Malkin lately?' she asked of
Christian, a day or two after.

'No, I haven't; I thought of him to make up our dinner on Sunday; but
you had rather not have him here, I daresay?'

'Oh, he is amusing. Ask him by all means,' said Marcella, carelessly.

'He may have heard about Peak from Earwaker, you know. If he begins to
talk before people'----

'Things have gone too far for such considerations,' replied his sister,
with a petulance strange to her habits of speech.

'Well, yes,' admitted Christian, glancing at her. 'We can't be
responsible.'

He reproached himself for this attitude towards Peak, but was heartily
glad that Marcella seemed to have learnt to regard the intriguer with a
wholesome indifference.

On the second day after Christmas, as they sat talking idly in the
dusking twilight, the door of the drawing-room was thrown open, and a
visitor announced. The name answered with such startling suddenness to
the thought with which Marcella had been occupied that, for an instant,
she could not believe that she had heard aright. Yet it was undoubtedly
Mr. Warricombe who presented himself. He came forward with a slightly
hesitating air, but Christian made haste to smooth the situation. With
the help of those commonplaces by which even intellectual people are at
times compelled to prove their familiarity with social usages,
conversation was set in movement.

Buckland could not be quite himself. The consciousness that he had
sought these people not at all for their own sake made him formal and
dry; his glances, his half-smile, indicated a doubt whether the Moxeys
belonged entirely to the sphere in which he was at home. Hence a rather
excessive politeness, such as the man who sets much store on breeding
exhibits to those who may at any moment, even in a fraction of a
syllable, prove themselves his inferiors. With men and women of the
unmistakably lower orders, Buckland could converse in a genial tone
that recommended him to their esteem; on the borderland of refinement,
his sympathies were repressed, and he held the distinctive part of his
mind in reserve.

Marcella desired to talk agreeably, but a weight lay upon her tongue;
she was struck with the resemblance in Warricombe's features to those
of his sister, and this held her in a troubled preoccupation,
occasionally evident when she made a reply, or tried to diversify the
talk by leading to a new topic. It was rather early in the afternoon,
and she had slight hope that any other caller would appear; a female
face would have been welcome to her, even that of foolish Mrs. Morton,
who might possibly look in before six o'clock. To her relief the door
did presently open, but the sharp, creaking footstep which followed was
no lady's; the servant announced Mr. Malkin.

Marcella's eyes gleamed strangely. Not with the light of friendly
welcome, though for that it could be mistaken. She rose quietly, and
stepped forward with a movement which again seemed to betoken eagerness
of greeting. In presenting the newcomer to Mr. Warricombe, she spoke
with an uncertain voice. Buckland was more than formal. The stranger's
aspect impressed him far from favourably, and he resented as an
impudence the hearty hand-grip to which he perforce submitted.

'I come to plead with you,' exclaimed Malkin, turning to Marcella, in
his abrupt, excited way. 'After accepting your invitation to dine, I
find that the thing is utterly and absolutely impossible. I had
entirely forgotten an engagement of the very gravest nature. I am
conscious of behaving in quite an unpardonable way.'

Marcella laughed down his excuses. She had suddenly become so mirthful
that Christian looked at her in surprise, imagining that she was unable
to restrain her sense of the ridiculous in Malkin's demeanour.

'I have hurried up from Wrotham,' pursued the apologist. 'Did I tell
you, Moxey, that I had taken rooms down there, to be able to spend a
day or two near my friends the Jacoxes occasionally? On the way here, I
looked in at Staple Inn, but Earwaker is away somewhere. What an odd
thing that people will go off without letting one know! It's such
common ill-luck of mine to find people gone away--I'm really astonished
to find you at home, Miss Moxey.'

Marcella looked at Warricombe and laughed.

'You must understand that subjectively,' she said, with nervous gaiety
which again excited her brother's surprise. 'Please don't be
discouraged by it from coming to see us again; I am very rarely out in
the afternoon.'

'But,' persisted Malkin, 'it's precisely my ill fortune to hit on those
rare moments when people _are_ out!--Now, I never meet acquaintances in
the streets of London; but, if I happen to be abroad, as likely as not
I encounter the last person I should expect to find. Why, you remember,
I rush over to America for scarcely a week's stay, and there I come
across a man who has disappeared astonishingly from the ken of all his
friends!'

Christian looked at Marcella. She was leaning forward, her lips
slightly parted, her eyes wide as if in gaze at something that
fascinated her. He saw that she spoke, but her voice was hardly to be
recognised.

'Are you quite sure of that instance, Mr. Malkin?'

'Yes, I feel quite sure, Miss Moxey. Undoubtedly it was Peak!'

Buckland Warricombe, who had been waiting for a chance of escape,
suddenly wore a look of interest. He rapidly surveyed the trio.
Christian, somewhat out of countenance, tried to answer Malkin in a
tone of light banter.

'It happens, my dear fellow, that Peak has not left England since we
lost sight of him.'

'What? He has been heard of? Where is he then?'

'Mr. Warricombe can assure you that he has been living for a year at
Exeter.'

Buckland, perceiving that he had at length come upon something
important to his purposes, smiled genially.

'Yes, I have had the pleasure of seeing Peak down in Devon from time to
time.'

'Then it was really an illusion!' cried Malkin. 'I was too hasty. Yet
that isn't a charge that can be often brought against me, I think. Does
Earwaker know of this?'

'He has lately heard,' replied Christian, who in vain sought for a
means of checking Malkin's loquacity. 'I thought he might have told
you.'

'Certainly not. The thing is quite new to me. And what is Peak doing
down there, pray? Why did he conceal himself?'

Christian gazed appealingly at his sister. She returned the look
steadily, but neither stirred nor spoke. It was Warricombe's voice that
next sounded:

'Peak's behaviour seems mysterious,' he began, with ironic gravity. 'I
don't pretend to understand him. What's your view of his character, Mr.
Malkin?'

'I know him very slightly indeed, Mr. Warricombe. But I have a high
opinion of his powers. I wonder he does so little. After that article
of his in _The Critical_'----

Malkin became aware of something like agonised entreaty on Christian's
countenance, but this had merely the effect of heightening his
curiosity.

'In _The Critical_?' said Warricombe, eagerly. 'I didn't know of that.
What was the subject?'

'To be sure, it was anonymous,' went on Malkin, without a suspicion of
the part he was playing before these three excited people. 'A paper
called "The New Sophistry", a tremendous bit of satire.'

Marcella's eyes closed as if a light had flashed before them; she drew
a short sigh, and at once seemed to become quite at ease, the smile
with which she regarded Warricombe expressing a calm interest.

'That article was Peak's?' Buckland asked, in a very quiet voice.

Christian at last found his opportunity.

'He never mentioned it to you? Perhaps he thought he had gone rather
too far in his Broad Churchism, and might be misunderstood.'

'Broad Churchism?' cried Malkin. 'Uncommonly broad, I must say!'

And he laughed heartily; Marcella seemed to join in his mirth.

'Then it would surprise you,' said Buckland, in the same quiet tone as
before, 'to hear that Peak is about to take Orders?'

'Orders?--For what?'

Christian laughed. The worst was over; after all, it came as a relief.

'Not for wines,' he replied. 'Mr. Warricombe means that Peak is going
to be ordained.'

Malkin's amazement rendered him speechless. He stared from one person
to another, his features strangely distorted.

'You can hardly believe it?' pressed Buckland.

The reply was anticipated by Christian saying:

'Remember, Malkin, that you had no opportunity of studying Peak. It's
not so easy to understand him.'

'But I don't see,' burst out the other, 'how I could possibly so
_mis_understand him! What has Earwaker to say?'

Buckland rose from his seat, advanced to Marcella, and offered his
hand. She said mechanically, 'Must you go?' but was incapable of
another word. Christian came to her relief, performed the needful
civilities, and accompanied his acquaintance to the foot of the stairs.
Buckland had become grave, stiff, monosyllabic; Christian made no
allusion to the scene thus suddenly interrupted, and they parted with a
formal air.

Malkin remained for another quarter of an hour, when the muteness of
his companions made it plain to him that he had better withdraw. He
went off with a sense of having been mystified, half resentful, and
vastly impatient to see Earwaker.