CHAPTER III


It occasionally happens that a woman whose early life has been directed
by native silliness and social bias, will submit to a tardy education
at the hands of her own children. Thus was it with Mrs Warricombe.

She came of a race long established in squirearchic dignity amid heaths
and woodlands. Her breeding was pure through many generations of the
paternal and maternal lines, representative of a physical type,
fortified in the males by much companionship with horse and hound, and
by the corresponding country pursuits of dowered daughters. At the time
of her marriage she had no charms of person more remarkable than rosy
comeliness and the symmetry of supple limb. As for the nurture of her
mind, it had been intrusted to home-governesses of respectable
incapacity. Martin Warricombe married her because she was one of a
little circle of girls, much alike as to birth and fortune, with whom
he had grown up in familiar communication. Timidity imposed restraints
upon him which made his choice almost a matter of accident. As befalls
often enough, the betrothal became an accomplished fact whilst he was
still doubting whether he desired it or not. When the fervour of early
wedlock was outlived, he had no difficulty in accepting as a matter of
course that his life's companion should be hopelessly illogical and at
heart indifferent to everything but the small graces and substantial
comforts of provincial existence. One of the advantages of wealth is
that it allows husband and wife to keep a great deal apart without any
show of mutual unkindness, a condition essential to happiness in
marriage. Time fostered in them a calm attachment, independent of
spiritual sympathy, satisfied with a common regard for domestic honour.

Not that Mrs. Warricombe remained in complete ignorance of her
husband's pursuits; social forms would scarcely have allowed this,
seeing that she was in constant intercourse, as hostess or guest, with
Martin's scientific friends. Of fossils she necessarily knew something.
Up to a certain point they amused her; she could talk of ammonites, of
brachiopods, and would point a friend's attention to the _Calceola
sandalina_ which Martin prized so much. The significance of
palaeontology she dimly apprehended, for in the early days of their
union her husband had felt it desirable to explain to her what was
meant by geologic time and how he reconciled his views on that subject
with the demands of religious faith. Among the books which he induced
her to read were Buckland's Bridgewater Treatise and the works of Hugh
Miller. The intellectual result was chaotic, and Mrs. Warricombe
settled at last into a comfortable private opinion, that though the
record of geology might be trustworthy that of the Bible was more so.
She would admit that there was no impiety in accepting the evidence of
nature, but held to a secret conviction that it was safer to believe in
Genesis. For anything beyond a quasi-permissible variance from biblical
authority as to the age of the world she was quite unprepared, and
Martin, in his discretion, imparted to her nothing of the graver doubts
which were wont to trouble him.

But as her children grew up, Mrs. Warricombe's mind and temper were
insensibly modified by influences which operated through her maternal
affections, influences no doubt aided by the progressive spirit of the
time. The three boys--Buckland, Maurice, and Louis--were distinctly of
a new generation. It needed some ingenuity to discover their points of
kindred with paternal and maternal grandparents; nor even with father
and mother had they much in common which observation could readily
detect. Sidwell, up to at least her fifteenth year, seemed to present
far less change of type. In her Mrs. Warricombe recognised a daughter,
and not without solace. But Fanny again was a problematical nature,
almost from the cradle. Latest born, she appeared to revive many
characteristics of the youthful Buckland, so far as a girl could
resemble her brother. It was a strange brood to cluster around Mrs.
Warricombe. For many years the mother was kept in alternation between
hopes and fears, pride and disapproval, the old hereditary habits of
mind, and a new order of ideas which could only be admitted with the
utmost slowness. Buckland's Radicalism deeply offended her; she
marvelled how such depravity could display itself in a child of hers.
Yet in the end her ancestral prejudices so far yielded as to allow of
her smiling at sentiments which she once heard with horror. Maurice,
whom she loved more tenderly, all but taught her to see the cogency of
a syllogism--amiably set forth. And Louis, with his indolent
good-nature, laughed her into a tolerance of many things which had
moved her indignation. But it was to Sidwell that in the end she owed
most. Beneath the surface of ordinary and rather backward girlhood,
which discouraged her father's hopes, Sidwell was quietly developing a
personality distinguished by the refinement of its ethical motives. Her
orthodoxy seemed as unimpeachable as Mrs Warricombe could desire, yet
as she grew into womanhood, a curiosity, which in no way disturbed the
tenor of her quietly contented life, led her to examine various forms
of religion, ancient and modern, and even systems of philosophy which
professed to establish a moral code, independent of supernatural faith.
She was not of studious disposition--that is to say, she had never
cared as a schoolgirl to do more mental work than was required of her,
and even now it was seldom that she read for more than an hour or two
in the day. Her habit was to dip into books, and meditate long on the
first points which arrested her thoughts. Of continuous application she
seemed incapable. She could read French, but did not attempt to pursue
the other languages of which her teachers had given her a smattering.
It pleased her best when she could learn from conversation. In this way
she obtained some insight into her father's favourite sciences,
occasionally making suggestions or inquiries which revealed a subtle if
not an acute intelligence.

Little by little Mrs. Warricombe found herself changing places with the
daughter whom she had regarded as wholly subject to her direction.
Sidwell began to exercise an indeterminate control, the proofs of which
were at length manifest in details of her mother's speech and
demeanour. An exquisite social tact, an unfailing insensibly as the
qualities of pure air: these were the points of sincerity of moral
judgment, a gentle force which operated as character to which Mrs.
Warricombe owed the humanisation observable when one compared her in
1885 with what she was, say, in 1874, when the sight of Professor Walsh
moved her to acrimony, and when she conceived a pique against Professor
Gale because the letter P has alphabetical precedence of W. Her
limitations were of course the same as ever, and from her sons she had
only learnt to be ashamed of announcing them too vehemently. Sidwell it
was who had led her to that degree of genuine humility, which is not
satisfied with hiding a fault but strives to amend it.

Martin Warricombe himself was not unaffected by the growth about him of
young men and maidens who looked upon the world with new eyes, whose
world, indeed, was another than that in which he had spent the better
part of his life. In his case contact with the young generation tended
to unsettlement, to a troublesome persistency of speculations which he
would have preferred to dismiss altogether. At the time of his
marriage, and for some years after, he was content to make a broad
distinction between those intellectual pursuits which afforded him
rather a liberal amusement than the pleasures of earnest study and the
questions of metaphysical faith which concerned his heart and
conscience. His native prejudices were almost as strong, and much the
same, as those of his wife; but with the vagueness of emotional logic
natural to his constitution, he satisfied himself that, by conceding a
few inessential points, he left himself at liberty to follow the
scientific movements of the day without damage to his religious
convictions. The tolerant smile so frequently on his countenance was
directed as often in the one quarter as in the other. Now it signified
a gentle reproof of those men of science who, like Professor Walsh,
'went too far', whose zeal for knowledge led them 'to forget the source
of all true enlightenment'; now it expressed a forbearing sympathy with
such as erred in the opposite direction, who were 'too literal in their
interpretation of the sacred volume'. Amiable as the smile was, it
betrayed weakness, and at moments Martin became unpleasantly conscious
of indisposition to examine his own mind on certain points. His life,
indeed, was one of debate postponed. As the realm of science extended,
as his intercourse with men who frankly avowed their 'infidelity' grew
more frequent, he ever and again said to himself that, one of these
days, he must sit down and 'have it out' in a solemn self-searching.
But for the most part he got on very well amid his inconsistencies.
Religious faith has rarely any connection with reasoning. Martin
believed because he believed, and avoided the impact of disagreeable
arguments because he wished to do so.

The bent of his mind was anything but polemical; he cared not to spend
time even over those authors whose attacks on the outposts of science,
or whose elaborate reconcilements of old and new, might have afforded
him some support. On the other hand, he altogether lacked that breadth
of intellect which seeks to comprehend all the results of speculation,
to discern their tendency, to derive from them a consistent theory of
the nature of things. Though a man be well versed in a science such as
palaeontology it does not follow that he will view it in its
philosophical relations. Martin had kept himself informed of all the
facts appertaining to his study which the age brought forth, but
without developing the new modes of mental life requisite for the
recognition of all that such facts involved. The theories of evolution
he did not venture openly to resist, but his acceptance of them was so
half-hearted that practically he made no use of their teaching. He was
no man of science, but an idler among the wonders which science uses
for her own purposes.

He regarded with surprise and anxiety the tendencies early manifested
in his son Buckland. Could he have had his way the lad would have grown
up with an impossible combination of qualities, blending the enthusiasm
of modern research with a spirit of expansive teleology. Whilst
Buckland was still of boyish years, the father treated with bantering
good-humour such outbreaks of irreverence as came immediately under his
notice, weakly abstaining from any attempt at direct argument or
influence. But, at a later time, there took place serious and painful
discussions, and only when the young man had rubbed off his edges in
the world's highways could Martin forget that stage of most unwelcome
conflict.

At the death of his younger boy, Maurice, he suffered a blow which had
results more abiding than the melancholy wherewith for a year or two
his genial nature was overshadowed. From that day onwards he was never
wholly at ease among the pursuits which had been wont to afford him an
unfailing resource against whatever troubles. He could no longer accept
and disregard, in a spirit of cheerful faith, those difficulties
science was perpetually throwing in his way. The old smile of kindly
tolerance had still its twofold meaning, but it was more evidently a
disguise of indecision, and not seldom touched with sadness. Martin's
life was still one of postponed debate, but he could not regard the day
when conclusions would be demanded of him as indefinitely remote.
Desiring to dwell in the familiar temporary abode, his structure of
incongruities and facile reconcilements, he found it no longer
weather-proof. The times were shaking his position with earthquake
after earthquake. His sons (for he suspected that Louis was hardly less
emancipated than Buckland) stood far aloof from him, and must in
private feel contemptuous of his old-fashioned beliefs. In Sidwell,
however, he had a companion more and more indispensable, and he could
not imagine that _her_ faith would ever give way before the invading
spirit of agnosticism. Happily she was no mere pietist. Though he did
not quite understand her attitude towards Christianity, he felt assured
that Sidwell had thought deeply and earnestly of religion in all its
aspects, and it was a solace to know that she found no difficulty in
recognising the large claims of science. For all this, he could not
deliberately seek her confidence, or invite her to a discussion of
religious subjects. Some day, no doubt, a talk of that kind would begin
naturally between them, and so strong was his instinctive faith in
Sidwell that he looked forward to this future communing as to a certain
hope of peace.

That a figure such as Godwin Peak, a young man of vigorous intellect,
preparing to devote his life to the old religion, should excite Mr.
Warricombe's interest was of course to be anticipated; and it seemed
probable enough that Peak, exerting all the force of his character and
aided by circumstances, might before long convert this advantage to a
means of ascendency over the less self-reliant nature. But here was no
instance of a dotard becoming the easy prey of a scientific Tartufe.
Martin's intellect had suffered no decay. His hale features and
dignified bearing expressed the mind which was ripened by sixty years
of pleasurable activity, and which was learning to regard with steadier
view the problems it had hitherto shirked. He could not change the
direction nature had given to his thoughts, and prepossession would in
some degree obscure his judgment where the merits and trustworthiness
of a man in Peak's circumstances called for scrutiny; but self-respect
guarded him against vulgar artifices, and a fine sensibility made it
improbable that he would become the victim of any man in whom base
motives predominated.

Left to his own impulses, he would still have proceeded with all
caution in his offers of friendly services to Peak. A letter of
carefully-worded admonition, which he received from his son, apprising
him of Peak's resolve to transfer himself to Exeter, scarcely affected
his behaviour when the young man appeared. It was but natural--he
argued--that Buckland should look askance on a case of 'conversion';
for his own part, he understood that such a step might be prompted by
interest, but he found it difficult to believe that to a man in Peak's
position, the Church would offer temptation thus coercive. Nor could he
discern in the candidate for a curacy any mark of dishonourable
purpose. Faults, no doubt, were observable, among them a tendency to
spiritual pride--which seemed (Martin could admit) an argument for,
rather than against, his sincerity. The progress of acquaintance
decidedly confirmed his favourable impressions; they were supported by
the remarks of those among his friends to whom Peak presently became
known.

It was not until Whitsuntide of the next year, when the student had
been living nearly five months at Exeter, that Buckland again came down
to visit his relatives. On the evening of his arrival, chancing to be
alone with Sidwell, he asked her if Peak had been to the house lately.

'Not many days ago,' replied his sister, 'he lunched with us, and then
sat with father for some time.'

'Does he come often?'

'Not very often. He is translating a German book which interests father
very much.'

'Oh, what book?'

'I don't know. Father has only mentioned it in that way.'

They were in a little room sacred to the two girls, very daintily
furnished and fragrant of sweet-brier, which Sidwell loved so much
that, when the season allowed it, she often wore a little spray of it
at her girdle. Buckland opened a book on the table, and, on seeing the
title, exclaimed with a disparaging laugh:

'I can't get out of the way of this fellow M'Naughten! Wherever I go,
there he lies about on the tables and chairs. I should have thought he
was thoroughly smashed by an article that came out in _The Critical_
last year.'

Sidwell smiled, evidently in no way offended.

'That article could "smash" nobody,' she made answer. 'It was too
violent; it overshot the mark.'

'Not a bit of it!--So you read it, eh? You're beginning to read, are
you?'

'In my humble way, Buckland.'

'M'Naughten, among other things. Humble enough, that, I admit.'

'I am not a great admirer of M'Naughten,' returned his sister, with a
look of amusement.

'No? I congratulate you.--I wonder what Peak thinks of the book?'

'I really don't know.'

'Then let me ask another question. What do you think of Peak?'

Sidwell regarded him with quiet reflectiveness.

'I feel,' she said, 'that I don't know him very well yet. He is
certainly interesting.'

'Yes, he is. Does he impress you as the kind of man likely to make a
good clergyman?'

'I don't see any reason why he should not.'

Her brother mused, with wrinkles of dissatisfaction on his brow.

'Father gets to like him, you say?'

'Yes, I think father likes him.'

'Well, I suppose it's all right.'

'All right?'

'It's the most astounding thing that ever came under my observation,'
exclaimed Buckland, walking away and then returning.

'That Mr. Peak should be studying for the Church?'

'Yes.'

'But do reflect more modestly!' urged Sidwell, with something that was
not quite archness, though as near it as her habits of tone and feature
would allow. 'Why should you refuse to admit an error in your own way
of looking at things? Wouldn't it be better to take this as a proof
that intellect isn't necessarily at war with Christianity?'

'I never stated it so broadly as that,' returned her brother, with
impatience. 'But I should certainly have maintained that _Peak's_
intellect was necessarily in that position.'

'And you see how wrong you would have been,' remarked the girl, softly.

'Well--I don't know.'

'You don't know?'

'I mean that I can't acknowledge what I can't understand.'

'Then do try to understand, Buckland!--Have you ever put aside your
prejudice for a moment to inquire what our religion really means? Not
once, I think--at all events, not since you reached years of
discretion.'

'Allow me to inform you that I studied the question thoroughly at
Cambridge.'

'Yes, yes; but that was in your boyhood.'

'And when does manhood begin?'

'At different times in different persons. In your case it was late.'

Buckland laughed. He was considering a rejoinder, when they were
interrupted by the appearance of Fanny, who asked at once:

'Shall you go to see Mr. Peak this evening, Buckland?'

'I'm in no hurry,' was the abrupt reply.

The girl hesitated.

'Let us all have a drive together--with Mr. Peak, I mean--like when you
were here last.'

'We'll see about it.'

Buckland went slowly from the room.

Late the same evening he sat with his father in the study. Mr
Warricombe knew not the solace of tobacco, and his son, though never
quite at ease without pipe or cigar, denied himself in this room, with
the result that he shifted frequently upon his chair and fell into many
awkward postures.

'And how does Peak impress you?' he inquired, when the subject he most
wished to converse upon had been postponed to many others. It was clear
that Martin would not himself broach it.

'Not disagreeably,' was the reply, with a look of frankness, perhaps
over-emphasised.

'What is he doing? I have only heard from him once since he came down,
and he had very little to say about himself.'

'I understand that he proposes to take the London B.A.'

'Oh, then, he never did that? Has he unbosomed himself to you about his
affairs of old time?'

'No. Such confidences are hardly called for.'

'Speaking plainly, father, you don't feel any uneasiness?'

Martin deliberated, fingering the while an engraved stone which hung
upon his watch-guard. He was at a disadvantage in this conversation.
Aware that Buckland regarded the circumstances of Peak's sojourn in the
neighbourhood with feelings allied to contempt, he could neither adopt
the tone of easy confidence natural to him on other occasions of
difference in opinion, nor express himself with the coldness which
would have obliged his son to quit the subject.

'Perhaps you had better tell me,' he replied, 'whether _you_ are really
uneasy.'

It was impossible for Buckland to answer as his mind prompted. He could
not without offence declare that no young man of brains now adopted a
clerical career with pure intentions, yet such was his sincere belief.
Made tolerant in many directions by the cultivation of his shrewdness,
he was hopelessly biassed in judgment as soon as his anti-religious
prejudice came into play--a point of strong resemblance between him and
Peak. After fidgeting for a moment, he exclaimed:

'Yes, I am; but I can't be sure that there's any cause for it.'

'Let us come to matters of fact,' said Mr. Warricombe, showing that he
was not sorry to discuss this side of the affair. 'I suppose there is
no doubt that Peak had a position till lately at the place he speaks
of?'

'No doubt whatever. I have taken pains to ascertain that. His account
of himself, so far, is strictly true.'

Martin smiled, with satisfaction he did not care to disguise.

'Have you met some acquaintance of his?'

'Well,' answered Buckland, changing his position, 'I went to work in
rather an underhand way, perhaps--but the results are satisfactory. No,
I haven't come across any of his friends, but I happened to hear not
long ago that he was on intimate terms with some journalists.'

His father laughed.

'Anything compromising in that association, Buckland?'

'I don't say that--though the fellows I speak of are hot Radicals.'

'Though?'

'I mean,' replied the young man, with his shrewder smile, 'that they
are not exactly the companions a theological student would select.'

'I understand. Possibly he has journalised a little himself?'

'That I can't say, though I should have thought it likely enough. I
might, of course, find out much more about him, but it seemed to me
that to have assurance of his truthfulness in that one respect was
enough for the present.'

'Do you mean, Buckland,' asked his father, gravely, 'that you have been
setting secret police at work?'

'Well, yes. I thought it the least objectionable way of getting
information.'

Martin compressed his lips and looked disapproval.

'I really can't see that such extreme measures were demanded. Come,
come; what is all this about? Do you suspect him of planning
burglaries? That was an ill-judged step, Buckland; decidedly
ill-judged. I said just now that Peak impressed me by no means
disagreeably. Now I will add that I am convinced of his good faith--as
sure of it as I am of his remarkable talents and aptitude for the
profession he aims at. In spite of your extraordinary distrust, I can't
feel a moment's doubt of his honour. Why, I could have told you myself
that he has known Radical journalists. He mentioned it the other day,
and explained how far his sympathy went with that kind of thing. No,
no; that was hardly permissible, Buckland.'

The young man had no difficulty in bowing to his father's reproof when
the point at issue was one of gentlemanly behaviour.

'I admit it,' he replied. 'I wish I had gone to Rotherhithe and made
simple inquiries in my own name. That, all things considered, I might
have allowed myself; at all events, I shouldn't have been at ease
without getting that assurance. If Peak had heard, and had said to me,
"What the deuce do you mean?" I should have told him plainly, what I
have strongly hinted to him already, that I don't understand what he is
doing in this galley.'

'And have placed yourself in a position not easy to define.'

'No doubt.'

'All this arises, my boy,' resumed Martin, in a tone of grave kindness,
'from your strange inability to grant that on certain matters you may
be wholly misled.'

'It does.'

'Well, well; that is forbidden ground. But do try to be less narrow.
Are you unable then to meet Peak in a friendly way?'

'Oh, by no means! It seems more than likely that I have wronged him.'

'Well said! Keep your mind open. I marvel at the dogmatism of men who
are set on overthrowing dogma. Such a position is so strangely
unphilosophic that I don't know how a fellow of your brains can hold it
for a moment. If I were not afraid of angering you,' Martin added, in
his pleasantest tone, 'I would quote the Master of Trinity.'

'A capital epigram, but it is repeated too often.'

Mr. Warricombe shook his head, and with a laugh rose to say good-night.

'It's a great pity,' he remarked next day to Sidwell, who had been
saying that her brother seemed less vivacious than usual, 'that
Buckland is defective on the side of humour. For a man who claims to be
philosophical he takes things with a rather obtuse seriousness. I know
nothing better than humour as a protection against the kind of mistake
he is always committing.'

The application of this was not clear to Sidwell.

'Has something happened to depress him?' she asked.

'Not that I know of. I spoke only of his general tendency to
intemperate zeal. That is enough to account for intervals of reaction.
And how much sounder his judgment of men would be if he could only see
through a medium of humour now and then! You know he is going over to
Budleigh Salterton this afternoon?'

Sidwell smiled, and said quietly:

'I thought it likely he would.'

At Budleigh Salterton, a nook on the coast some fifteen miles away,
Sylvia Moorhouse was now dwelling. Her mother, a widow of substantial
means, had recently established herself there, in the proximity of
friends, and the mathematical brother made his home with them. That
Buckland took every opportunity of enjoying Sylvia's conversation was
no secret; whether the predilection was mutual, none of his relatives
could say, for in a matter such as this Buckland was by nature disposed
to reticence. Sidwell's intimacy with Miss Moorhouse put her in no
better position than the others for forming an opinion; she could only
suspect that the irony which flavoured Sylvia's talk with and
concerning the Radical, intimated a lurking kindness. Buckland's
preference was easily understood, and its growth for five or six years
seemed to promise stability.

Immediately after luncheon the young man set forth, and did not
reappear until the evening of the next day. His spirits had not
benefited by the excursion; at dinner he was noticeably silent, and
instead of going to the drawing-room afterwards he betook himself to
the studio up on the roof, and smoked in solitude. There, towards ten
o'clock, Sidwell sought him. Heavy rain was beating upon the glass, and
a high wind blended its bluster with the cheerless sound.

'Don't you find it rather cold here?' she asked, after observing her
brother's countenance of gloom.

'Yes; I'm coming down.--Why don't you keep up your painting?'

'I have lost interest in it, I'm afraid.'

'That's very weak, you know. It seems to me that nothing interests you
permanently.'

Sidwell thought it better to make no reply.

'The characteristic of women,' Buckland pursued, with some asperity,
throwing away the stump of his cigar. 'It comes, I suppose, of their
ridiculous education--their minds are never trained to fixity of
purpose. They never understand themselves, and scarcely ever make an
effort to understand any one else. Their life is a succession of
inconsistencies.'

'This generalising is so easy,' said Sidwell, with a laugh, 'and so
worthless. I wonder you should be so far behind the times.'

'What light have the times thrown on the subject?'

'There's no longer such a thing as _woman_ in the abstract. We are
individuals.'

'Don't imagine it! That may come to pass three or four generations
hence, but as yet the best of you can only vary the type in unimportant
particulars. By the way, what is Peak's address?'

'Longbrook Street; but I don't know the number. Father can give it you,
I think.'

'I shall have to drop him a note. I must get back to town early in the
morning.'

'Really? We hoped to have you for a week.'

'Longer next time.'

They descended together. Now that Louis no longer abode here (he had
decided at length for medicine, and was at work in London), the family
as a rule spent very quiet evenings. By ten o'clock Mrs Warricombe and
Fanny had retired, and Sidwell was left either to talk with her father,
or to pursue the calm meditations which seemed to make her independent
of companionship as often as she chose.

'Are they all gone?' Buckland asked, finding a vacant room.

'Father is no doubt in the study.'

'It occurs to me--. Do you feel satisfied with this dead-alive
existence?'

'Satisfied? No life could suit me better.'

'You really think of living here indefinitely?'

'As far as I am concerned, I hope nothing may ever disturb us.'

'And to the end of your life you will scent yourself with sweetbrier?
Do try a bit of mint for a change.'

'Certainly, if it will please you.'

'Seriously, I think you might all come to town for next winter. You are
rusting, all of you. Father was never so dull, and mother doesn't seem
to know how to pass the days. It wouldn't be bad for Louis to be living
with you instead of in lodgings. Do just think of it. It's ages since
you heard a concert, or saw a picture.'

Sidwell mused, and her brother watched her askance.

'I don't know whether the others would care for it,' she said, 'but I
am not tempted by a winter of fog.'

'Fog? Pooh! Well, there is an occasional fog, just now and then, but
it's much exaggerated. Who ever thinks of the weather in England? Fanny
might have a time at Bedford College or some such place-she learns
nothing here. Think it over. Father would be delighted to get among the
societies, and so on.'

He repeated his arguments in many forms, and Sidwell listened
patiently, until they were joined by Mr. Warricombe, whereupon the
subject dropped; to be resumed, however, in correspondence, with a
persistency which Buckland seldom exhibited in anything which affected
the interests of his relatives. As the summer drew on, Mrs Warricombe
began to lend serious ear to this suggestion of change, and Martin was
at all events moved to discuss the pros and cons of half a year in
London. Sidwell preserved neutrality, seldom making an allusion to the
project; but Fanny supported her brother's proposal with sprightly
zeal, declaring on one occasion that she began distinctly to feel the
need of 'a higher culture', such as London only could supply.

In the meantime there had been occasional interchange of visits between
the family and their friends at Budleigh Salterton. One evening, when
Mrs. Moorhouse and Sylvia were at the Warricombes', three or four
Exeter people came to dine, and among the guests was Godwin Peak--his
invitation being due in this instance to Sylvia's express wish to meet
him again.

'I am studying men,' she had said to Sidwell not long before, when the
latter was at the seaside with her. 'In our day this is the proper
study of womankind. Hitherto we have given serious attention only to
one another. Mr. Peak remains in my memory as a type worth observing;
let me have a chance of talking to him when I come next.'

She did not neglect her opportunity, and Mrs. Moorhouse, who also
conversed with the theologian and found him interesting, was so good as
to hope that he would call upon her if ever his steps turned towards
Budleigh Salterton.

After breakfast next morning, Sidwell found her friend sitting with a
book beneath one of the great trees of the garden. At that moment
Sylvia was overcome with laughter, evidently occasioned by her reading.

'Oh,' she exclaimed, 'if this man isn't a great humorist! I don't think
I ever read anything more irresistible.'

The book was Hugh Miller's _Testimony of the Rocks_, a richly bound
copy belonging to Mrs. Warricombe.

'I daresay you know it very well; it's the chapter in which he
discusses, with perfect gravity, whether it would have been possible
for Noah to collect examples of all living creatures in the ark. He
decides that it wouldn't--that the deluge _must_ have spared a portion
of the earth; but the details of his argument are delicious, especially
this place where he says that all the insects could have been brought
together only "at enormous expense of miracle"! I suspected a secret
smile; but no--that's out of the question. "At enormous expense of
miracle"!'

Sylvia's eyes winked as she laughed, a peculiarity which enhanced the
charm of her frank mirth. Her dark, pure complexion, strongly-marked
eyebrows, subtle lips, were shadowed beneath a great garden hat, and a
loose white gown, with no oppressive moulding at the waist, made her a
refreshing picture in the glare of mid-summer.

'The phrase is ridiculous enough,' assented Sidwell. 'Miracle can be
but miracle, however great or small its extent.'

'Isn't it strange, reading a book of this kind nowadays? What a leap we
have made! I should think there's hardly a country curate who would be
capable of bringing this argument into a sermon.'

'I don't know,' returned Sidwell, smiling. 'One still hears remarkable
sermons.'

'What will Mr. Peak's be like?'

They exchanged glances. Sylvia wore a look of reflective curiosity, and
her friend answered with some hesitation, as if the thought were new to
her:

'They won't deal with Noah, we may take that for granted.'

'Most likely not with miracles, however little expensive.'

'Perhaps not. I suppose he will deal chiefly with the moral teaching of
Christianity.'

'Do you think him strong as a moralist?' inquired Sylvia.

'He has very decided opinions about the present state of our
civilisation.'

'So I find. But is there any distinctly moral force in him?'

'Father thinks so,' Sidwell replied, 'and so do our friends the
Lilywhites.'

Miss Moorhouse pondered awhile.

'He is a great problem to me,' she declared at length, knitting her
brows with a hint of humorous exaggeration. 'I wonder whether he
believes in the dogmas of Christianity.'

Sidwell was startled.

'Would he think of becoming a clergyman?'

'Oh, why not? Don't they recognise nowadays that the spirit is enough?'

There was silence. Sidwell let her eyes wander over the sunny grass to
the red-flowering creeper on the nearest side of the house.

'That would involve a great deal of dissimulation,' she said at length.
'I can't reconcile it with what I know of Mr. Peak.'

'And I can't reconcile anything else,' rejoined the other.

'He impresses you as a rationalist?'

'You not?'

'I confess I have taken his belief for granted. Oh, think! He couldn't
keep up such a pretence. However you justify it, it implies conscious
deception. It would be dishonourable. I am sure _he_ would think it so.'

'How does your brother regard him?' Sylvia asked, smiling very
slightly, but with direct eyes.

'Buckland can't credit anyone with sincerity except an aggressive
agnostic.'

'But I think he allows honest credulity.'

Sidwell had no answer to this. After musing a little, she put a
question which indicated how her thoughts had travelled.

'Have you met many women who declared themselves agnostics?'

'Several.'

Sylvia removed her hat, and began to fan herself gently with the brim.
Here, in the shade, bees were humming; from the house came faint notes
of a piano--Fanny practising a mazurka of Chopin.

'But never, I suppose, one who found a pleasure in attacking
Christianity?'

'A girl who was at school with me in London,' Sylvia replied, with an
air of amused reminiscence. 'Marcella Moxey. Didn't I ever speak to you
of her?'

'I think not.'

'She was bitter against religion of every kind.'

'Because her mother made her learn collects, I dare say?' suggested
Sidwell, in a tone of gentle satire.

'No, no. Marcella was about eighteen then, and had neither father nor
mother.--(How Fanny's touch improves!)--She was a born atheist, in the
fullest sense of the word.'

'And detestable?'

'Not to me--I rather liked her. She was remarkably honest, and I have
sometimes thought that in morals, on the whole, she stood far above
most women. She hated falsehood--hated it with all her heart, and a
story of injustice maddened her. When I think of Marcella it helps me
to picture the Russian girls who propagate Nihilism.'

'You have lost sight of her?'

'She went abroad, I think. I should like to have known her fate. I
rather think there will have to be many like her before women are
civilised.'

'How I should like to ask her,' said Sidwell, 'on what she supported
her morality?'

'Put the problem to Mr. Peak,' suggested the other, gaily. 'I fancy he
wouldn't find it insoluble.'

Mrs. Warricombe and Mrs. Moorhouse appeared in the distance, walking
hither under parasols. The girls rose to meet them, and were presently
engaged in less interesting colloquy.