Chapter XIII


Making her nod suffice for a good-night, Letty, with the red volume of
Hans Andersen under her arm, passed out into the hall. It was not easy
to carry herself with the necessary nonchalance, but she got strength
by saying inwardly: "Here's where I begin to walk on blades." The
knowledge that she was doing it, and that she was doing it toward an
end, gave her a dignity of carriage which Allerton watched with
sharpened observation.

Reaching the little back spare room she found the door open, and
Steptoe sweeping up the hearth before a newly lighted fire. Beppo,
whose basket had been established here, jumped from his shelter to paw
up at her caressingly. With the hearth-brush in his hand Steptoe
raised himself to say:

"Madam'll excuse me, but I thought as the evenin' was chilly----"

"He doesn't want me to stay."

She brought out the fact abruptly, lifelessly, because she couldn't
keep it back. The calm she had been able to maintain downstairs was
breaking up, with a quivering of the lip and two rolling tears.

Slowly and absently Steptoe dusted his left hand with the hearth-brush
held in his right. "If madam's goin' to decide 'er life by what
another person wants she ain't never goin' to get nowhere."

There were tears now in the voice. "Yes, but when it's--_him_."

"'Im or anybody else, we all 'ave to fight for what we means to myke
of our own life. It's a poor gyme in which I don't plye my 'and for
all I think it'll win."

"Do you mean that I should--act independent?"

"'Aven't madam an independent life?"

"Havin' an independent life don't make it easier to stay where you're
not wanted."

"Oh, if madam's lookin' first for what's easy----"

"I'm not. I'm lookin' first for what he'll _like_."

Hanging the hearth-brush in its place he took the tongs to adjust a
smoking log. "I've been lookin' for what 'e'd like ever since 'e was
born; and now I see that gettin' so much of what 'e liked 'asn't been
good for 'im. If madam'd strike out on 'er own line, whether 'e liked
it or not, and keep at it till 'e 'ad to like it----"

"Oh, but when it's--" she sought for the right word--"when it's so
humiliatin'----"

"Humiliatin' things is not so 'ard to bear, once you've myde up your
mind as they're to be borne." He put up the tongs, to busy himself
with the poker. "Madam'll find that humiliation is a good deal like
that there quinine; bitter to the tyste, but strengthenin'. I've
swallered lots of it; and look at me to-dye."

"I know as well as he does that it's all been a crazy mistake----"

"I was readin' the other day--I'm fond of a good book, I am--occupies
the mind like--but I was readin' about a circus man in South Africa,
what 'e myde a mistyke and took the wrong tryle--and just when 'e was
a-givin' 'imself up for lost among the tigers and the colored savages
'e found 'e'd tumbled on a mine of diamonds. Big 'ouse in Park Lyne in
London now, and 'is daughter married to a Lord."

"Oh, I've tumbled into the mine of diamonds all right. The question
is----"

"If madam really tumbled, or was led by the 'and of Providence."

She laughed, ruefully. "If that was it the hand of Providence 'd have
to have some pretty funny ways."

"I've often 'eard as the wyes of Providence was strynge; but I ain't
so often 'eard as Providence 'ad got to myke 'em strynge to keep pyce
with the wyes of men. Now if the 'and of Providence 'ad picked out
madam for Mr. Rash, it'd 'ave to do somethink out of the common, as
you might sye, to bring together them as man had put so far apart." He
looked round the room with the eye of a head-waiter inspecting a table
in a restaurant. "Madam 'as everythink? Well, if there's anythink else
she's only got to ring."

Bowing himself out he went down the stairs to attend to those duties
of the evening which followed the return of the master of the house.
In the library and dining-room he saw to the window fastenings, and
put out the one light left burning in each room. In the hall he locked
the door with the complicated locks which had helped to guarantee the
late Mrs. Allerton against burglars. There was not only a bolt, a
chain, and an ordinary lock, but there was an ingenious double lock
which turned the wrong way when you thought you were turning it the
right, and could otherwise baffle the unskilful. Occupied with this
task he could peep over his shoulder, through the unlighted front
drawing-room, and see his adored one standing on the hearthrug, his
hands clasped behind him, and his head bent, in an attitude of
meditation.

Steptoe, having much to say to him, felt the nervousness of a prime
minister going into the presence of a sovereign who might or might not
approve his acts. It was at once the weakness and the strength of his
position that his rule was based on an unwritten constitution. Being
unwritten it allowed of a borderland where powers were undefined.
Powers being undefined his scope was the more easily enlarged, though
now and then he found that the sovereign rebelled against the mayor of
the palace and had to be allowed his way.

But the sovereign was nursing no seeds of the kind of discontent which
Steptoe was afraid of. As a matter of fact he was thinking of the way
in which Letty had left the room. The perspective, the tea-gown, the
effectively dressed hair, enabled him to perceive the combination of
results which Madame Simone had called _de l'elegance naturelle_. She
had that; he could see it as he hadn't seen it hitherto. It must have
given what value there was to her poor little roles in motion
pictures. Now that his eye had caught it, it surprised, and to some
degree disturbed, him. It was more than the show-girl's inane
prettiness, or the comely wax-work face of the girl on the cover of a
magazine. With due allowance for her Anglo-Saxonism and honesty, she
was the type of woman to whom "things happen." Things would happen to
her, Allerton surmised, beyond anything she could experience in his
cumbrous and antiquated house. This queer episode would drop behind
her as an episode and no more, and in the multitude of future
incidents she would almost forget that she had known him. He hoped to
God that it would be so, and yet....

He was noting too that she hadn't taxed him, in the way of calling on
his small supply of nervous energy. Rather she had spared it, and he
felt himself rested. After a talk with Barbara he was always spent.
Her emotional furies demanded so much of him that they used him up.
This girl, on the contrary, was soothing. He didn't know how she was
soothing; but she was. He couldn't remember when he had talked to a
woman with so little thought of what he was to say and how he was to
say it, and heaven only knew that the things to be said between them
were nerve-racking enough. But they had come out of their own accord,
those nerve-racking things, probably, he reasoned, because she was a
girl of inferior class with whom he didn't have to be particular.

She was quick, too, to catch the difference between his speech and her
own. She was quick--and pathetic. Her self-correction amused him, with
a strain of pity in his amusement. If a girl like that had only had a
chance.... And just then Steptoe broke in on his musing by entering
the room.

The first subject to be aired was that of the changes in the household
staff, and Steptoe raised it diplomatically. Mrs. Courage and Jane had
taken offense at the young lydy's presence, and packed themselves off
in dishonorable haste. Had it not been that two men friends of his own
were ready to come at an hour's notice the house would have been
servantless till he had procured strangers. No condemnation could be
too severe for Mrs. Courage and Jane, for not content with leaving the
house in dudgeon they had insulted the young lydy before they went.

"Sooner or lyter they would 'a' went any'ow. For this long time back
they've been too big for their boots, as you might sye. If Mr. Rash
'ad married the other young lydy she wouldn't 'a' stood 'em a week. It
don't do to keep servants too long, not when they've got no more than
a menial mind, which Jynie and Mrs. Courage 'aven't. The minute they
'eard that this young lydy was in the 'ouse.... And beautiful the wye
she took it, Mr. Rash. I never see nothink finer on the styge nor in
the movin' pictures. Like a young queen she was, a-tellin' 'em that
she 'adn't come to this 'ouse to turn out of it them as 'ad 'ad it as
their 'ome, like, and that she'd put it up to them. If they went she'd
stye; but if they styed she'd go----"

"She's going anyhow."

Steptoe moved away to feel the fastenings of the back windows.
"That'll be a relief to us, sir, won't it?" he said, without turning
his head.

"It'll make things easier--certainly."

"I was just 'opin' that it mightn't be--well, not too soon."

"What do you mean by too soon?"

"Well, sir, I've been thinkin' it over through the dye, just as you
told me to do this mornin,' and I figger out--" on a table near him he
began to arrange the disordered books and magazines--"I figger out
that if she was to go it'd better be in a wye agreeable to all
concerned. It wouldn't do, I syes to myself, for Mr. Rash to bring a
young woman into this 'ouse and 'ave 'er go awye feelin' anythink but
glad she'd come."

"That'll be some job."

"It'll be some job, sir; but it'll be worth it. It ain't only on the
young lydy's account; it'll be on Mr. Rash's."

"On Mr. Rash's--how?"

The magazines lapping over each other in two long lines, he
straightened them with little pats. "What I suppose you mean to do,
sir, is to get out o' this matrimony and enter into the other as you
thought as you wasn't goin' to enter into."

"Well?"

"And when you'd entered into the other you wouldn't want it on your
mind--on your conscience, as you might sye--that there was a young
lydy in the world as you'd done a kind o' wrong to."

Allerton took three strides across the corner of the room, and three
strides back to the fireplace again. "How am I going to escape that?
She says she won't let me give her any money."

"Oh, money!" Steptoe brushed money aside as if it had no value. "She
wouldn't of course. Not 'er sort."

"But what _is_ 'er sort. She seemed one thing yesterday, and to-day
she's another."

"That's somethink like what I mean. That young lydy 'as growed more in
twenty-four hours than lots'd grow in twenty-four years." He
considered how best to express himself further. "Did Mr. Rash ever
notice that it isn't bein' born of a certain kind o' family as'll myke
a man a gentleman? Of course 'e did. But did 'e ever notice that a
man'll often _not_ be born of a certain kind o' family, and yet be a
gentleman all the syme?"

"I know what you're driving at; but it depends on what you mean by a
gentleman."

"And I couldn't 'ardly sye--not no more than I could tell you what the
smell of a flower was, not even while you was a-smellin' of it. You
know a gentleman's a gentleman, and you may think it's this or that
what mykes 'im so, but there ain't no wye to put it into words. Now
you, Mr. Rash, anybody'd know you was a gentleman what merely looked
at you through a telescope; but you couldn't explyne it, not if you
was took all to pieces like the works of a clock. It ain't nothink you
do and nothink you sye, because if we was to go by that----"

"Good Lord, stop! We're not talking about me."

"No, Mr. Rash. We're talkin' about the queer thing it is what mykes
a gentleman, and I sye that I can't sye. But I _know_. Now, tyke
Eugene. 'E's just a chauffeur. But no one couldn't be ten minutes with
Eugene and not know 'e's a gentleman through and through.
Obligin'--good-mannered--modest--polite to the very cat 'e is--and
always with that nice smile--wouldn't _you_ sye as Eugene was a
gentleman, if anybody was to arsk you, Mr. Rash?"

"If they asked me from that point of view--yes--probably. But what has
that to do with it?"

"It 'as this to do with it that when you arsk me what sort that young
lydy is I 'ave to reply as she's not the sort to accept money from
strynge gentlemen, because it ain't what she's after."

"Then what on earth _is_ she after? Whatever it is she can have it, if
I can only find out what it is."

Steptoe answered this in his own way. "It's very 'ard for the poor to
see so much that's good and beautiful in the world, and know that they
can't 'ave none of it. I felt that myself before I worked up to where
I am now. 'Ere in New York a poor boy or a poor girl can't go out into
the street without seein' the things they're cryvin' for in their
insides flaunted at 'em like--shook in their fyces--while the law and
the police and the church and everythink what mykes our life says to
'em, 'There's none o' this for you.'"

"Well, money would buy it, wouldn't it?"

"Money'd buy it if money knew what to buy. But it don't. Mr. Rash must
'ave noticed that there's nothink 'elplesser than the people with
money what don't know 'ow to spend it. I used to be that wye myself
when I'd 'ave a little cash. I wouldn't know what to blow myself to
what wouldn't be like them vulgar new-rich. But the new-rich is vulgar
only because our life 'as put the 'orse before the cart with 'em, as
you might sye, in givin' them the money before showin' 'em what to do
with it."

Having straightened the lines of magazines to the last fraction of an
inch he found a further excuse for lingering by moving back into their
accustomed places the chairs which had been disarranged.

"You 'ave to get the syme kind of 'ang of things as you and me've got,
Mr. Rash, to know what it is you want, and 'ow to spend your money
wise like. Pleasure isn't just in 'avin' things; it's in knowin'
what's good to 'ave and what ain't. Now this young lydy'd be like a
child with a dime sent into a ten-cent store to buy whatever 'e'd
like. There's so many things, and all the syme price, that 'e's kind
of confused like. First 'e thinks it'll be one thing, and then 'e
thinks it'll be another, and 'e ends by tykin' the wrong thing,
because 'e didn't 'ave nothink to tell 'im 'ow to choose. Mr. Rash
wouldn't want a young lydy to whom 'e's indebted, as you might sye, to
be like that, now would 'e?"

"It doesn't seem to me that I've got anything to do with it. If I
offer her the money, and can get her to take it----"

"That's where she strikes me as wiser than Mr. Rash, for all she don't
know but so little. That much she knows by hinstinck."

"Then what am I going to do?"

"That'd be for Mr. Rash to sye. If it was me----"

The necessity for getting an armchair exactly beneath a portrait
seemed to cut this sentence short.

"Well, if it was you--what then?"

"Before I'd give 'er money I'd teach 'er the 'ang of our kind o' life,
like. That's what she's aichin' and cryvin' for. A born lydy she is,
and 'ankerin' after a lydy's wyes, and with no one to learn 'em to
'er----"

"But, good heavens, I can't do that."

"No, Mr. Rash, but I could, if you was to leave 'er 'ere for a bit. I
could learn 'er to be a lydy in the course of a few weeks, and 'er so
quick to pick up. Then if you was to settle a little hincome on 'er
she wouldn't----"

Allerton took the bull by the horns. "She wouldn't be so likely to go
to the bad. That's what you mean, isn't it?"

Moving behind Allerton, who continued to stand on the hearthrug,
Steptoe began poking the embers, making them safe for the night.

"Did Mr. Rash ever notice that goin' to the bad, as 'e calls it, ain't
the syme for them as 'ave nothink as it looks to them as 'ave
everythink? When you're 'ungry for food you heats the first thing you
can lie your 'ands on; and when you're 'ungry for life you do the
first thing as'll promise you the good you're lookin' for. What people
like you and me is hapt to call goin' to the bad ain't mostly no more
than a 'ankerin' for good which nothink don't seem to feed."

Allerton smiled. "That sounds to me as if it might be dangerous
doctrine."

"What excuses the poor'll often seem dyngerous doctrine to the rich,
Mr. Rash. Our kind is awful afryde of their kind gettin' a little bit
of what they're longin' for, and especially 'ere in America. When
we've took from them most of the means of 'aving a little pleasure
lawful, we call it dyngerous if they tyke it unlawful like, and we go
to work and pass laws agynst them. Protectin' them agynst theirselves
we sye it is, and we go at it with a gun."

"But we're talking of----"

"Of the young lydy, sir. Quite so. It's on 'er account as I'm syin'
what I'm syin'. You arsk me if I think she'll go to the bad in cyse
we turn 'er out, and I sye that----"

Allerton started. "There's no question of our turning her out. She's
sick of it."

"Then that'd be my point, wouldn't it, sir? If she goes because she's
sick of it, why, then, natural like, she'll look somewhere else for
what--for what she didn't find with us. You may call it goin' to the
bad, but it'll be no more than tryin' to find in a wrong wye what life
'as denied 'er in a right one."

Allerton, who had never in his life been asked to bear moral
responsibility, was uneasy at this philosophy, changing the subject
abruptly.

"Where did she get the clothes?"

"Me and 'er, Mr. Rash, went to Margot's this mornin' and bought a
bunch of 'em."

"The deuce you did! And you used my name?"

"No, sir," Steptoe returned, with dignity, "I used mine. I didn't give
no 'andle to gossip. I pyde for the things out o' some money I 'ad in
'and--my own money, Mr. Rash--and 'ad 'em all sent to me. I thought as
we was mykin' a mistyke the young lydy'd better look proper while we
was mykin' it; and I knew Mr. Rash'd feel the syme."

The situation was that in which the _faineant_ king accepts the act of
the mayor of the palace because it is Hobson's choice. Moreover, he
was willing that she should have the clothes. If she wouldn't take
money she would at least apparently take them, which, in a measure,
would amount to the same thing. He was dwelling on this bit of
satisfaction when Steptoe continued.

"And as long as the young lydy remynes with us, Mr. Rash, I thought
it'd be discreeter like not to 'ave no more women pokin' about, and
tryin' to find out what 'ad better not be known. It mykes it simpler
as she 'erself arsks to be called Miss Gravely----"

"Oh, she does?"

"Yes, sir; and that's what I've told William and Golightly, the waiter
and the chef, is 'er nyme. It mykes it all plyne to 'em----"

"Plain? Why, they'll think----"

"No, sir. They won't think. When it comes to what's no one's business
but your own women thinks; men just haccepts. They tykes things for
granted, and don't feel it none of their affair. Mr. Rash'll 'ave
noticed that there's a different kind of honor among women from what
there is among men. I don't sye but what the women's is all right,
only the men's is easier to get on with."

There being no response to these observations Steptoe made ready to
withdraw. "And shall you stye 'ome for breakfast, sir?"

"I'll see in the morning."

"Very good, sir. I've locked up the 'ouse and seen to everythink, if
you'll switch off the lights as you come up. Good-night, Mr. Rash."

"Good-night."