The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Moon Pool
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Moon Pool

Author: Abraham Merritt

Release date: December 1, 1996 [eBook #765]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOON POOL ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Moon Pool

A. MERRITT




Foreword

The publication of the following narrative of Dr. Walter T. Goodwin
has been authorized by the Executive Council of the International
Association of Science.

First:

To end officially what is beginning to be called the Throckmartin
Mystery and to kill the innuendo and scandalous suspicions which have
threatened to stain the reputations of Dr. David Throckmartin, his
youthful wife, and equally youthful associate Dr. Charles Stanton ever
since a tardy despatch from Melbourne, Australia, reported the
disappearance of the first from a ship sailing to that port, and the
subsequent reports of the disappearance of his wife and associate from
the camp of their expedition in the Caroline Islands.

Second:

Because the Executive Council have concluded that Dr. Goodwin's
experiences in his wholly heroic effort to save the three, and the
lessons and warnings within those experiences, are too important
to humanity as a whole to be hidden away in scientific papers
understandable only to the technically educated; or to be presented
through the newspaper press in the abridged and fragmentary form
which the space limitations of that vehicle make necessary.

For these reasons the Executive Council commissioned Mr. A. Merritt
to transcribe into form to be readily understood by the layman the
stenographic notes of Dr. Goodwin's own report to the Council,
supplemented by further oral reminiscences and comments by Dr.
Goodwin; this transcription, edited and censored by the Executive
Council of the Association, forms the contents of this book.

Himself a member of the Council, Dr. Walter T. Goodwin, Ph.D.,
F.R.G.S. etc., is without cavil the foremost of American botanists, an
observer of international reputation and the author of several epochal
treaties upon his chosen branch of science. His story, amazing in the
best sense of that word as it may be, is fully supported by proofs
brought forward by him and accepted by the organization of which I
have the honor to be president. What matter has been elided from
this popular presentation--because of the excessively menacing
potentialities it contains, which unrestricted dissemination might
develop--will be dealt with in purely scientific pamphlets of
carefully guarded circulation.

THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SCIENCE
  Per J. B. K., President




CONTENTS

       I  The Thing on the Moon Path
      II  "Dead!  All Dead!"
     III  The Moon Rock
      IV  The First Vanishings
       V  Into the Moon Pool
      VI  "The Shining Devil Took Them!"
     VII  Larry O'Keefe
    VIII  Olaf's Story
      IX  A Lost Page of Earth
       X  The Moon Pool
      XI  The Flame-Tipped Shadows
     XII  The End of the Journey
    XIII  Yolara, Priestess of the Shining One
     XIV  The Justice of Lora
      XV  The Angry, Whispering Globe
     XVI  Yolara of Muria vs. the O'Keefe
    XVII  The Leprechaun
   XVIII  The Amphitheatre of Jet
     XIX  The Madness of Olaf
      XX  The Tempting of Larry
     XXI  Larry's Defiance
    XXII  The Casting of the Shadow
   XXIII  Dragon Worm and Moss Death
    XXIV  The Crimson Sea
     XXV  The Three Silent Ones
    XXVI  The Wooing of Lakla
   XXVII  The Coming of Yolara
  XXVIII  In the Lair of the Dweller
    XXIX  The Shaping of the Shining One
     XXX  The Building of the Moon Pool
    XXXI  Larry and the Frog-Men
   XXXII  "Your Love; Your Lives; Your Souls!"
  XXXIII  The Meeting of Titans
   XXXIV  The Coming of the Shining One
    XXXV  "Larry--Farewell!"