EPILOGUE


Professor Wilson had been living in London for six years and he was
just back from a visit to America. One afternoon, soon after his
return, he put on his frock-coat and drove in a hansom to pay a call
upon Hilda Burgoyne, who still lived at her old number, off Bedford
Square. He and Miss Burgoyne had been fast friends for a long time. He
had first noticed her about the corridors of the British Museum, where
he read constantly. Her being there so often had made him feel that he
would like to know her, and as she was not an inaccessible person, an
introduction was not difficult. The preliminaries once over, they came
to depend a great deal upon each other, and Wilson, after his day’s
reading, often went round to Bedford Square for his tea. They had much
more in common than their memories of a common friend. Indeed, they
seldom spoke of him. They saved that for the deep moments which do not
come often, and then their talk of him was mostly silence. Wilson knew
that Hilda had loved him; more than this he had not tried to know.

It was late when Wilson reached Hilda’s apartment on this particular
December afternoon, and he found her alone. She sent for fresh tea and
made him comfortable, as she had such a knack of making people
comfortable.

“How good you were to come back before Christmas! I quite dreaded the
Holidays without you. You’ve helped me over a good many Christmases.”
She smiled at him gayly.

“As if you needed me for that! But, at any rate, I needed _you_. How
well you are looking, my dear, and how rested.”

He peered up at her from his low chair, balancing the tips of his long
fingers together in a judicial manner which had grown on him with
years.

Hilda laughed as she carefully poured his cream. “That means that I was
looking very seedy at the end of the season, doesn’t it? Well, we must
show wear at last, you know.”

Wilson took the cup gratefully. “Ah, no need to remind a man of
seventy, who has just been home to find that he has survived all his
contemporaries. I was most gently treated—as a sort of precious relic.
But, do you know, it made me feel awkward to be hanging about still.”

“Seventy? Never mention it to me.” Hilda looked appreciatively at the
Professor’s alert face, with so many kindly lines about the mouth and
so many quizzical ones about the eyes. “You’ve got to hang about for
me, you know. I can’t even let you go home again. You must stay put,
now that I have you back. You’re the realest thing I have.”

Wilson chuckled. “Dear me, am I? Out of so many conquests and the
spoils of conquered cities! You’ve really missed me? Well, then, I
shall hang. Even if you have at last to put ME in the mummy-room with
the others. You’ll visit me often, won’t you?”

“Every day in the calendar. Here, your cigarettes are in this drawer,
where you left them.” She struck a match and lit one for him. “But you
did, after all, enjoy being at home again?”

“Oh, yes. I found the long railway journeys trying. People live a
thousand miles apart. But I did it thoroughly; I was all over the
place. It was in Boston I lingered longest.”

“Ah, you saw Mrs. Alexander?”

“Often. I dined with her, and had tea there a dozen different times, I
should think. Indeed, it was to see her that I lingered on and on. I
found that I still loved to go to the house. It always seemed as if
Bartley were there, somehow, and that at any moment one might hear his
heavy tramp on the stairs. Do you know, I kept feeling that he must be
up in his study.” The Professor looked reflectively into the grate. “I
should really have liked to go up there. That was where I had my last
long talk with him. But Mrs. Alexander never suggested it.”

“Why?”

Wilson was a little startled by her tone, and he turned his head so
quickly that his cuff-link caught the string of his nose-glasses and
pulled them awry. “Why? Why, dear me, I don’t know. She probably never
thought of it.”

Hilda bit her lip. “I don’t know what made me say that. I didn’t mean
to interrupt. Go on please, and tell me how it was.”

“Well, it was like that. Almost as if he were there. In a way, he
really is there. She never lets him go. It’s the most beautiful and
dignified sorrow I’ve ever known. It’s so beautiful that it has its
compensations, I should think. Its very completeness is a compensation.
It gives her a fixed star to steer by. She doesn’t drift. We sat there
evening after evening in the quiet of that magically haunted room, and
watched the sunset burn on the river, and felt him. Felt him with a
difference, of course.”

Hilda leaned forward, her elbow on her knee, her chin on her hand.
“With a difference? Because of her, you mean?”

Wilson’s brow wrinkled. “Something like that, yes. Of course, as time
goes on, to her he becomes more and more their simple personal
relation.”

Hilda studied the droop of the Professor’s head intently. “You didn’t
altogether like that? You felt it wasn’t wholly fair to him?”

Wilson shook himself and readjusted his glasses. “Oh, fair enough. More
than fair. Of course, I always felt that my image of him was just a
little different from hers. No relation is so complete that it can hold
absolutely all of a person. And I liked him just as he was; his
deviations, too; the places where he didn’t square.”

Hilda considered vaguely. “Has she grown much older?” she asked at
last.

“Yes, and no. In a tragic way she is even handsomer. But colder. Cold
for everything but him. ‘Forget thyself to marble’; I kept thinking of
that. Her happiness was a happiness _à deux_, not apart from the world,
but actually against it. And now her grief is like that. She saves
herself for it and doesn’t even go through the form of seeing people
much. I’m sorry. It would be better for her, and might be so good for
them, if she could let other people in.”

“Perhaps she’s afraid of letting him out a little, of sharing him with
somebody.”

Wilson put down his cup and looked up with vague alarm. “Dear me, it
takes a woman to think of that, now! I don’t, you know, think we ought
to be hard on her. More, even, than the rest of us she didn’t choose
her destiny. She underwent it. And it has left her chilled. As to her
not wishing to take the world into her confidence—well, it is a pretty
brutal and stupid world, after all, you know.”

Hilda leaned forward. “Yes, I know, I know. Only I can’t help being
glad that there was something for him even in stupid and vulgar people.
My little Marie worshiped him. When she is dusting I always know when
she has come to his picture.”

Wilson nodded. “Oh, yes! He left an echo. The ripples go on in all of
us. He belonged to the people who make the play, and most of us are
only onlookers at the best. We shouldn’t wonder too much at Mrs.
Alexander. She must feel how useless it would be to stir about, that
she may as well sit still; that nothing can happen to her after
Bartley.”

“Yes,” said Hilda softly, “nothing can happen to one after Bartley.”

They both sat looking into the fire.