CHAPTER VI.


Letter From Pisistratus Caxton TO Albert Trevanion, Esq., M.P.

(The confession of a youth who in the Old World finds himself one too
many.)

     My Dear Mr. Trevanion,--I thank you cordially, and so we do all,
     for your reply to my letter informing you of the villanous traps
     through which we have passed,--not indeed with whole skins, but
     still whole in life and limb,--which, considering that the traps
     were three, and the teeth sharp, was more than we could reasonably
     expect.  We have taken to the wastes, like wise foxes as we are,
     and I do not think a bait can be found that will again snare the
     fox paternal.  As for the fox filial it is different, and I am
     about to prove to you that he is burning to redeem the family
     disgrace.  Ah! my dear Mr. Trevanion, if you are busy with "blue-
     books" when this letter reaches you, stop here, and put it aside
     for some rare moment of leisure.  I am about to open my heart to
     you, and ask you, who know the world so well, to aid me in an
     escape from those flammantia maenia wherewith I find that world
     begirt and enclosed.  For look you, sir, you and my father were
     right when you both agreed that the mere book-life was not meant
     for me.  And yet what is not book-life, to a young man who would
     make his way through the ordinary and conventional paths to
     fortune?  All the professions are so book-lined, book-hemmed, book-
     choked, that wherever these strong hands of mine stretch towards
     action, they find themselves met by octavo ramparts, flanked with
     quarto crenellations.  For first, this college life, opening to
     scholarships, and ending, perchance, as you political economists
     would desire, in Malthusian fellowships,--premiums for celibacy,--
     consider what manner of thing it is!

     Three years, book upon book,--a great Dead Sea before one; three
     years long, and all the apples that grow on the shore full of the
     ashes of pica and primer!  Those three years ended, the fellowship,
     it may be, won,--still books, books, if the whole world does not
     close at the college gates.  Do I, from scholar, effloresce into
     literary man, author by profession?  Books, books!  Do I go into
     the law?  Books, books!  Ars longa, vita brevis, which,
     paraphrased, means that it is slow work before one fags one's way
     to a brief!  Do I turn doctor?  Why, what but books can kill time
     until, at the age of forty, a lucky chance may permit me to kill
     something else?  The Church (for which, indeed, I don't profess to
     be good enough),--that is book-life par excellence, whether,
     inglorious and poor, I wander through long lines of divines and
     Fathers; or, ambitious of bishoprics, I amend the corruptions, not
     of the human heart, but of a Greek text, and through defiles of
     scholiasts and commentators win my way to the See.  In short,
     barring the noble profession of arms,--which you know, after all,
     is not precisely the road to fortune,--can you tell me any means by
     which one may escape these eternal books, this mental clockwork and
     corporeal lethargy?  Where can this passion for life that runs riot
     through my veins find its vent?  Where can these stalwart limbs and
     this broad chest grow of value and worth in this hot-bed of
     cerebral inflammation and dyspeptic intellect?  I know what is in
     me; I know I have the qualities that should go with stalwart limbs
     and broad chest.  I have some plain common-sense, some promptitude
     and keenness, some pleasure in hardy danger, some fortitude in
     bearing pain,--qualities for which I bless Heaven, for they are
     qualities good and useful in private life.  But in the forum of
     men, in the market of fortune, are they not flocci, nauci, nihili?

     In a word, dear sir and friend, in this crowded Old World there is
     not the same room that our bold forefathers found for men to walk
     about and jostle their neighbors.  No; they must sit down like boys
     at the form, and work out their tasks, with rounded shoulders and
     aching fingers.  There has been a pastoral age, and a hunting age,
     and a fighting age; now we have arrived at the age sedentary.  Men
     who sit longest carry all before them,--puny, delicate fellows,
     with hands just strong enough to wield a pen, eyes so bleared by
     the midnight lamp that they see no joy in that buxom sun (which
     draws me forth into the fields, as life draws the living), and
     digestive organs worn and macerated by the relentless flagellation
     of the brain.  Certainly, if this is to be the Reign of Mind, it is
     idle to repine, and kick against the pricks; but is it true that
     all these qualities of action that are within me are to go for
     nothing?  If I were rich and happy in mind and circumstance, well
     and good; I should shoot, hunt, farm, travel, enjoy life, and snap
     my fingers at ambition.  If I were so poor and so humbly bred that
     I could turn gamekeeper or whipper in, as pauper gentlemen
     virtually did of old, well and good too; I should exhaust this
     troublesome vitality of mine by nightly battles with poachers, and
     leaps over double dikes and stone walls.  If I were so depressed of
     spirit that I could live without remorse on my father's small
     means, and exclaim, with Claudian, "The earth gives me feasts that
     cost nothing," well and good too; it were a life to suit a
     vegetable, or a very minor poet.  But as it is,--here I open
     another leaf of my heart to you!  To say that, being poor, I want
     to make a fortune, is to say that I am an Englishman.  To attach
     ourselves to a thing positive, belongs to our practical race.  Even
     in our dreams, if we build castles in the air, they are not Castles
     of Indolence,--indeed they have very little of the castle about
     them, and look much more like Hoare's Bank, on the east side of
     Temple Bar!  I desire, then, to make a fortune.  But I differ from
     my countrymen, first, by desiring only what you rich men would call
     but a small fortune; secondly, in wishing that I may not spend my
     whole life in that fortune-making.  Just see, now, how I am placed.

     Under ordinary circumstances, I must begin by taking from my father
     a large slice of an income that will ill spare paring.  According
     to my calculation, my parents and my uncle want all they have got,
     and the subtraction of the yearly sum on which Pisistratus is to
     live till he can live by his own labors, would be so much taken
     from the decent comforts of his kindred.  If I return to Cambridge,
     with all economy, I must thus narrow still more the res angusta
     domi; and when Cambridge is over, and I am turned loose upon the
     world,--failing, as is likely enough, of the support of a
     fellowship,--how many years must I work, or rather, alas! not work,
     at the Bar (which, after all, seems my best calling) before I can
     in my turn provide for those who, till then, rob themselves for me;
     till I have arrived at middle life, and they are old and worn out;
     till the chink of the golden bowl sounds but hollow at the ebbing
     well?  I would wish that, if I can make money, those I love best
     may enjoy it while enjoyment is yet left to them; that my father
     shall see "The History of Human Error" complete, bound in russia on
     his shelves; that my mother shall have the innocent pleasures that
     content her, before age steals the light from her happy smile; that
     before Roland's hair is snow-white (alas! the snows there thicken
     fast), he shall lean on my arm while we settle together where the
     ruin shall be repaired or where left to the owls, and where the
     dreary bleak waste around shall laugh with the gleam of corn.  For
     you know the nature of this Cumberland soil,--you, who possess much
     of it, and have won so many fair acres from the wild; you know that
     my uncle's land, now (save a single farm) scarce worth a shilling
     an acre, needs but capital to become an estate more lucrative than
     ever his ancestors owned.  You know that, for you have applied your
     capital to the same kind of land, and in doing so, what blessings--
     which you scarcely think of in your London library--you have
     effected, what mouths you feed, what hands you employ!  I have
     calculated that my uncle's moors, which now scarce maintain two or
     three shepherds, could, manured by money, maintain two hundred
     families by their labor.  All this is worth trying for; therefore
     Pisistratus wants to make money.  Not so much,--he does not require
     millions; a few spare thousand pounds would go a long way, and with
     a modest capital to begin with, Roland should become a true
     squire,--a real landowner, not the mere lord of a desert.  Now
     then, dear sir, advise me how I may, with such qualities as I
     possess, arrive at that capital--ay, and before it is too late--so
     that money-making may not last till my grave.

     Turning in despair from this civilized world of ours, I have cast
     my eyes to a world far older,--and yet more to a world in its giant
     childhood.  India here, Australia there,--what say you, sir, you
     who will see dispassionately those things that float before my eyes
     through a golden haze, looming large in the distance?  Such is my
     confidence in your judgment that you have but to say, "Fool, give
     up thine El Dorados and stay at home; stick to the books and the
     desk; annihilate that redundance of animal life that is in thee;
     grow a mental machine: thy physical gifts are of no avail to thee;
     take thy place among the slaves of the Lamp,"--and I will obey
     without a murmur.  But if I am right; if I have in me attributes
     that here find no market; if my repinings are but the instincts of
     nature that, out of this decrepit civilization, desire vent for
     growth in the young stir of some more rude and vigorous social
     system,--then give me, I pray, that advice which may clothe my idea
     in some practical and tangible embodiments.  Have I made myself
     understood?

     We take no newspaper here, but occasionally one finds its way from
     the parsonage; and I have lately rejoiced at a paragraph that spoke
     of your speedy entrance into the Administration as a thing certain.
     I write to you before you are a minister, and you see what I seek
     is not in the way of official patronage.  A niche in an office,--
     oh, to me that were worse than all!  Yet I did labor hard with you,
     but,--that was different.  I write to you thus frankly, knowing
     your warm, noble heart, and as if you were my father.  Allow me to
     add my humble but earnest congratulations on Miss Trevanion's
     approaching marriage with one worthy, if not of her, at least of
     her station.  I do so as becomes one whom you have allowed to
     retain the right to pray for the happiness of you and yours.  My
     dear Mr. Trevanion, this is a long letter, and I dare not even read
     it over, lest, if I do, I should not send it.  Take it with all its
     faults, and judge of it with that kindness with which you have
     judged ever,

               Your grateful and devoted servant,

               Pisistratus Caxton.

Letter From Albert Trevanion, Esq., M. P., To Pisistratus Caxton.

     Library of the House of Commons, Tuesday Night.

     My Dear Pisistratus,-- ----- is up; we are in for it for two mortal
     hours!  I take flight to the library, and devote those hours to
     you.  Don't be conceited, but that picture of yourself which you
     have placed before me has struck me with all the force of an
     original.  The state of mind which you describe so vividly must be
     a very common one in our era of civilization, yet I have never
     before seen it made so prominent and life-like.  You have been in
     my thoughts all day.  Yes, how many young men must there be like
     you, in this Old World, able, intelligent, active, and persevering
     enough, yet not adapted for success in any of our conventional
     professions,--"mute, inglorious Raleighs."  Your letter, young
     artist, is an illustration of the philosophy of colonizing.  I
     comprehend better, after reading it, the old Greek colonization,--
     the sending out, not only the paupers, the refuse of an over-
     populated state, but a large proportion of a better class, fellows
     full of pith and sap and exuberant vitality, like yourself,
     blending, in those wise cleruchioe, a certain portion of the
     aristocratic with the more democratic element; not turning a rabble
     loose upon a new soil, but planting in the foreign allotments all
     the rudiments of a harmonious state, analogous to that in the
     mother country; not only getting rid of hungry, craving mouths, but
     furnishing vent for a waste surplus of intelligence and courage,
     which at home is really not needed, and more often comes to ill
     than to good,--here only menaces our artificial embankments, but
     there, carried off in an aqueduct, might give life to a desert.

     For my part, in my ideal of colonization I should like that each
     exportation of human beings had, as of old, its leaders and
     chiefs,--not so appointed from the mere quality of rank (often,
     indeed, taken from the humbler classes), but still men to whom a
     certain degree of education should give promptitude, quickness,
     adaptability; men in whom their followers can confide.  The Greeks
     understood that.  Nay, as the colony makes progress, as its
     principal town rises into the dignity of a capital,--a polls that
     needs a polity,--I sometimes think it might be wise to go still
     further, and not only transplant to it a high standard of
     civilization, but draw it more closely into connection with the
     parent state, and render the passage of spare intellect, education,
     and civility, to and fro, more facile, by drafting off thither the
     spare scions of royalty itself.  I know that many of my more
     "liberal" friends would pooh-pooh this notion; but I am sure that
     the colony altogether, when arrived to a state that would bear the
     importation, would thrive all the better for it.  And when the day
     shall come (as to all healthful colonies it must come sooner or
     later) in which the settlement has grown an independent state, we
     may thereby have laid the seeds of a constitution and a
     civilization similar to our own, with self-developed forms of
     monarchy and aristocracy, though of a simpler growth than old
     societies accept, and not left a strange, motley chaos of
     struggling democracy,-an uncouth, livid giant, at which the
     Frankenstein may well tremble, not because it is a giant, but
     because it is a giant half completed. (1)  Depend on it, the New
     World will be friendly or hostile to the Old, not in proportion to
     the kinship of race, but in proportion to the similarity of manners
     and institutions,--a mighty truth to which we colonizers have been
     blind.

     Passing from these more distant speculations to this positive
     present before us, you see already, from what I have said, that I
     sympathize with your aspirations; that I construe them as you would
     have me: looking to your nature and to your objects, I give you my
     advice in a word,--Emigrate!

     My advice is, however, founded on one hypothesis; namely, that you
     are perfectly sincere,--you will be contented with a rough life,
     and with a moderate fortune at the end of your probation.  Don't
     dream of emigrating if you want to make a million, or the tenth of
     a million.  Don't dream of emigrating unless you can enjoy its
     hardships,--to bear them is not enough!

     Australia is the land for you, as you seem to surmise.  Australia
     is the land for two classes of emigrants: first, the man who has
     nothing but his wits, and plenty of them; secondly, the man who has
     a small capital, and who is contented to spend ten years in
     trebling it.  I assume that you belong to the latter class.  Take
     out L3,000, and before you are thirty years old you may return with
     L10,000 or L12,000.  If that satisfies you, think seriously of
     Australia.  By coach, tomorrow, I will send you down all the best
     books and reports on the subject; and I will get you what detailed
     information I can from the Colonial Office.  Having read these, and
     thought over them dispassionately, spend some months yet among the
     sheep-walks of Cumberland; learn all you can from all the shepherds
     you can find,--from Thyrsis to Menalcas.  Do more,--fit yourself in
     every way for a life in the Bush, where the philosophy of the
     division of labor is not yet arrived at.  Learn to turn your hand
     to everything.  Be something of a smith, something of a carpenter,
     --do the best you can with the fewest tools; make yourself an
     excellent shot; break in all the wild horses and ponies you can
     borrow and beg.  Even if you want to do none of these things when
     in your settlement, the having learned to do them will fit you for
     many other things not now foreseen.  De-fine-gentlemanize yourself
     from the crown of your head to the sole of your foot, and become
     the greater aristocrat for so doing; for he is more than an
     aristocrat, he is a king, who suffices in all things for himself,--
     who is his own master, because he wants no valetaille.  I think
     Seneca has expressed that thought before me; and I would quote the
     passage, but the book, I fear, is not in the library of the House
     of Commons.  But now (cheers, by Jove!  I suppose ---- is down.  Ah!
     it is so; and C--- is up, and that cheer followed a sharp hit at me.
     How I wish I were your age, and going to Australia with you!)--But
     now--to resume my suspended period--but now to the important
     point,--capital.  You must take that, unless you go as a shepherd,
     and then good-by to the idea of L10,000 in ten years.  So, you see,
     it appears at the first blush that you must still come to your
     father; but, you will say, with this difference, that you borrow
     the capital with every chance of repaying it instead of frittering
     away the income year after year till you are eight and thirty or
     forty at least.  Still, Pisistratus, you don't, in this, gain your
     object at a leap; and my dear old friend ought not to lose his son
     and his money too.  You say you write to me as to your own father.
     You know I hate, professions; and if you did not mean what you say,
     you have offended me mortally.  As a father, then, I take a
     father's rights, and speak plainly.  A friend of mine, Mr. Bolding,
     a clergyman, has a son,--a wild fellow, who is likely to get into
     all sorts of scrapes in England, but with plenty of good in him
     notwithstanding, frank, bold, not wanting in talent, but rather in
     prudence, easily tempted and led away into extravagance.  He would
     make a capital colonist (no such temptations in the Bush!) if tied
     to a youth like you.  Now I propose, with your leave, that his
     father shall advance him L1,500, which shall not, however, be
     placed in his hands, but in yours, as head partner in the firm.
     You, on your side, shall advance the same sum of L1,500, which you
     shall borrow from me for three years without interest.  At the end
     of that time interest shall commence; and the capital, with the
     interest on the said first three years, shall be repaid to me, or
     my executors, on your return.  After you have been a year or two in
     the Bush, and felt your way, and learned your business, you may
     then safely borrow L1,500 more from your father; and, in the mean
     while, you and your partner will have had together the full sum of
     L3,000 to commence with.  You see in this proposal I make you no
     gift, and I run no risk even by your death.  If you die insolvent,
     I will promise to come on your father, poor fellow; for small joy
     and small care will he have then in what may be left of his
     fortune.  There--I have said all; and I will never forgive you if
     you reject an aid that will serve you so much and cost me so
     little.

     I accept your congratulations on Fanny's engagement with Lord
     Castleton.  When you return from Australia you will still be a
     young man, she (though about your own years) almost a middle-aged
     woman, with her head full of pomps and vanities.  All girls have a
     short period of girlhood in common; but when they enter womanhood,
     the woman becomes the woman of her class.  As for me, and the
     office assigned to me by report, you know what I said when we
     parted, and--But here J--- comes, and tells me that "I am expected
     to speak, and answer N---, who is just up, brimful of malice,"--the
     House crowded, and hungering for personalities.  So I, the man of
     the Old World, gird up my loins, and leave you, with a sigh, to the
     fresh youth of the New

          "Ne tibi sit duros acuisse in prcelia dentes."

     Yours affectionately,

     Albert Trevanion.