CHAPTER XVII


When Clyde awoke next morning she lay for some time in dreamy content.
She was deliciously rested. The cold, clear, early morning air pouring
in through the open window beneath the partially drawn blind was like
an invigorating draught. Outside, beyond the shade of the veranda, she
could see sunlight. Somewhere a horse whinnied. In the house she could
hear an occasional rattle of dishes. She rose and dressed, humming a
song. She felt strangely happy, as though she had attained a
long-sought goal. Life that morning seemed to take on a new meaning to
her; to be sweeter and cleaner, good in itself, a thing to rejoice in.
The very air she breathed seemed charged with the indistinguishable
odours of growing things, as it might strike the unspoiled, sensitive
nostrils of a child. She felt a child's joy in merely being.

"How well you are looking, Clyde," said Kitty Wade, as she entered the
breakfast room.

"Positively blooming," said Wade.

"Positively bloomin' hungry," laughed Clyde. "I haven't had such an
appetite since I left boarding school."

"God save all here!" said Casey, from the door. "How did you sleep? No
need to ask you ladies, and it doesn't matter about Wade. Hey, you,
Feng! You catch breakfast quick!"

During the meal they made plans for the day. In the morning Casey was
going to shift the water to his oats; in the afternoon he would drive
them over to Talapus. They would have supper there, and return by
moonlight. Meanwhile they were to consider the place theirs, to go
where and do what they liked.

"I'll help you," Wade offered.

"We'll all help you," said Clyde.

"I can rig Wade out for irrigating," Casey replied, "but not you
ladies. It's too muddy a job for you."

"But I should like to see how it is done," said Clyde.

She had her way, and accompanied them to the field, watching the
turning of the water down the rows, the careful adjustment of its flow,
and the progress of the streams. In spite of her care she became wet
and muddy--and enjoyed herself the more.

"I told you so," said Casey. "No sympathy, Miss Burnaby."

"I don't want it. I'm enjoying myself. I'd like to play in the water,
to sail sticks down the ditch, and pretend that they were boats."

"Shocking!" he laughed. "But I'd like to play with you."

"Nice pair of kids you are," Wade commented. He was perspiring from
unaccustomed exertion. "'Pon my soul, though, I feel the same. To think
of me messing away my life in a tenth-story office worrying about other
people's business and quarrels! What do you keep in this air, Casey?
Old Ponce de Leon's Fountain of Youth?"

"I keep some very fair Scotch in a cupboard at the house," Casey
responded. "The water is all right now. Suppose we adjourn."

"I'll go you once," said Wade.

"Where do I come in?" Clyde asked. "I'm thirsty, too."

"Feng shall produce Chakchak fizzes for both of us."

They trooped into the house, thirsty, hungry, and laughing, and Kitty
Wade exclaimed at Clyde's dress.

"Thank Heaven I didn't go!" she cried. "Mr. Dunne, you should get a
commission from her dressmaker."

"Oh, this will wash. And I'm so beautifully hungry and thirsty."

"Thirsty! With all that water?" said Kitty Wade.

"What's water got to do with real thirst?" her husband demanded. "Come
on, Casey; don't muzzle the ox, you know. Produce that Wonderful Remedy
from the Land o' Cakes. It was oats we were irrigating, wasn't it? Very
appropriate. Here's to Oats--oatmeal, rolled oats, wild oats, and Titus
Oates. 'Tak' a wee bit drappie----'"

"Whatever has got into you?" his wife demanded.

"I feel like a pup off a chain," Wade admitted.

After dinner Clyde went to her room to prepare for the drive to
Talapus. She inspected her limited wardrobe thoughtfully, finally
selecting the plainest and most unpretentious attire in her possession;
so that when she took a last look in the mirror she saw a girl wearing
a panama hat, a white shirtwaist, and a tweed golf skirt. Kitty Wade,
rather more elaborately costumed, eyed her critically.

"Oh, bother!" she said. "This isn't fair. You make me feel all dressed
up, but it's too much trouble to change."

"I looked at it the other way--it was too much trouble to dress up,"
Clyde replied. "I don't suppose one needs to, out here. I'm going to
be comfy, anyway."

Kitty Wade forebore comment, but she smiled wisely to herself. Inwardly
she reflected that simplicity of dress was Clyde's long suit. With her
hair, complexion, and figure the less fussiness there was to distract
the eye the better. And Mrs. Wade was inclined to attribute to the
fortunate owner of these things a perfect knowledge of this fact.

Mrs. Wade had the front seat, beside Casey, while Clyde sat with Wade.
Clyde experienced a distinct feeling of disappointment. Wade was a good
companion and a good friend, _but_--and the "but" was a big one.

She found herself listening to Casey's voice, watching the set of his
shoulders, noting the deep, living bronze of his skin. From time to
time he turned, including them in the conversation, pointing out things
of interest to Wade. But nevertheless she did not enjoy the drive.

"I sent word that we were coming," said Casey, as they sighted the
ranch. "That was in the interests of the ladies mostly."

"Of course," Wade agreed. "Women always like people to find them all
togged up, as if they never did a day's work in their lives. I catch it
from Kitty if I bring any one home with me without due notice. If women
only knew how much better they look in ordinary clothes!"

Kitty Wade, turning her head to retort, surprised a quiet, enigmatic
smile on Clyde's face. Their eyes met, and keen question and defiant
answer leaped across the glance. Kitty Wade let the retort remain
unspoken, and contemplated the nigh chestnut's ears, for her husband's
last words had given her a clew.

"Oh, Clyde Burnaby, Clyde Burnaby!" she said to herself with a little
shake of the head. "Now I know. What a deep finesse! You think
that this McCrae girl will put on her best country-maid--or
country-made--finery; and you, in your studied simplicity, will show
the better by contrast--to the masculine eye, at least. I give you full
credit, my dear. Not one woman in a thousand would have thought of it.
_I_ shouldn't, and I know men better than you do. But why did you do
it? Are you _jealous_ of a girl you've never seen? And does that mean
you care--seriously care--for our pleasant but likely impecunious Mr.
Dunne?"

She was still puzzling over this problem when they drove up to the
house. Donald McCrae and his wife welcomed them, and he and Casey took
the team to the stable. But as the others reached the welcome shade of
the veranda Sheila emerged from the house and came forward. At sight of
her Kitty Wade smiled to herself.

For Sheila had not donned finery. She was clad in simple white,
unrelieved by any touch of colour. Not a ring adorned her slim, brown
hands. Her masses of glistening, brown hair were dressed low on her
head, giving an effect almost girlish, softening the keenness of her
face. She was as composed, as dignified, as essentially ladylike as
Clyde herself.

Clyde thanked her gracefully for the arrangement of their rooms. It was
very good of her to take such trouble for strangers.

"Oh, but I'm afraid I did that for Casey, and not for the strangers,"
laughed Sheila. "I hope old Feng didn't undo my work. He thought I was
butting in. Anyway, Casey would have seen that you were comfortable,
though some of his ideas of domestic arrangements are masculine, to say
the least of them." She told the story of the hen, and set them
laughing.

Later Casey, having stabled the horses, came up with McCrae. "Well,
Sheila, what's the good word?" he asked. "What yarns have you been
telling Miss Burnaby?"

"I was telling her of your poultry system."

"Miss McCrae has been suggesting all sorts of things for our
amusement," said Clyde; "from a dance to riding lessons."

"I didn't say a word about lessons," Sheila protested.

"But I need them," Clyde admitted. "I never pretend to know what I
don't know."

"Sheila can give most men lessons," said Casey. "The only objection I
have is that I intended to instruct you myself."

Clyde laughed. "Which offer shall I accept?"

"Casey's," said Sheila promptly. "I won't be selfish. Besides,
educational statistics prove that we women imbibe knowledge faster from
men than from each other."

Clyde darted a swift glance at her. But Sheila's face told nothing. If
the words were intended to bear an added meaning she did not show it.

"Statistics are good for something, at last," said Casey.

"Give her Dolly," said Sheila. "Don't let her coax you into letting her
try that old brute, Shiner. He's almost an outlaw."

"Love me, love my horse!"

The quotation seemed careless. Sheila's face told Clyde nothing.

"'Like master, like horse' is more appropriate," said Sheila.

"Oh, I'm not an outlaw--yet," he said, with just the slightest pause
before the word.

Slight though it was, Clyde noticed it; noticed, too, the instant
shadow on Sheila's face, the quick contraction of her dark brows, the
momentary silence, transient but utter. It was as if the chill and
gloom of night had suddenly struck the summer's noonday.

But in a moment the conversation was resumed, and became general. Sandy
McCrae joined them, silent as usual, but evidently attracted by Clyde.
Presently Sheila took Casey to diagnose the case of a favourite, sick
collie.

"My heavens, Casey, did you see the kid?" she asked. "I never knew him
to look twice at a girl before."

"Every boy has to start some time," he laughed. "She's well worth
looking at."

"That's so. Yes, she's very pretty, Casey."

"I'm glad you like her."

It was on the tip of her tongue to disclaim, but she checked herself.
"She's different from what I expected. No airs. And she _looks_
sensible. Is she?"

"I think so."

"Yes, I think so, too. She dresses very simply. I was prepared to be
reduced to a condition of helpless feminine envy by her clothes. As it
is, I feel quite of the same clay."

"You don't need to envy anybody's clothes. That white dress looks good
to me. I never saw you looking better."

The rich blood crept up under her tanned cheeks. Such compliments were
rare in her life. Casey himself seldom paid them. Frank friendship was
very well; but now and then, womanlike, she longed for such current
coin of courtesy.

"Really, Casey?"

"Of course," he assured her. "You know how to wear clothes. And you
know you look particularly well in white. I've told you so before."

"Once."

"Half a dozen times."

"No--once. I remember it very well, because you don't often notice what
I have on. Perhaps that's lucky, too."

"If it's you in the clothes, that's good enough."

"That's just the trouble. You accept me as part of the everyday
scenery. I might wear a blanket, for all you'd care."

"I've seen some mighty becoming blanket costumes."

"I'm not a _klootch_," she flashed. "I'm a white woman, and when I wear
a becoming dress I like somebody to tell me so."

"And didn't I just tell you?"

"So you did--and I'll put a ring around the date. It's the first time
you've condescended to pay me a compliment in a year. You men are the
limit. You take it as a matter of course that a girl should be neat and
spick and span. If she wasn't you'd notice it soon enough. It's easy
for a girl like this Miss Burnaby. I don't suppose she ever did a day's
work or anything useful in her life. She orders her clothes from the
best places, and gets them fitted and sent home, and that's all there
is to it. But how about me? I've got a hundred things to attend to
every day. I've got to make my own clothes, or take a long chance on a
mail-order house. That's why, when I do get anything that looks
passable, I like it to be noticed."

"That's so," he admitted. "That's natural. I never thought of it,
Sheila, and that's the truth. Why didn't you tell me before?"

"Oh, heavens! Casey, I'm sorry I did now. Why do men have to be _told_?
I don't get taken this way often. Women and dogs have to be thankful
for small mercies. Only a dog can shove a cold, wet nose into his
master's hand and get a pat and a kind word; but a woman----"

She broke off, colouring furiously. The red tide surged over cheeks and
brow to the roots of her hair. For the first time, with him, she was
afraid of being misunderstood.

But Casey's perceptions, fairly acute where men and affairs were
concerned, quite failed to grasp the situation. He saw only that
Sheila, ordinarily sensible and dependable, had flown off the handle
over something, and he metaphorically threw up his hands helplessly at
the vagaries of women.

"Well, well, now, never mind," he said, in blundering consolation. "You
look well in anything. I've often noticed, but I didn't think you cared
for compliments. Anyway"--he grasped eagerly at something safe--"anyway,
you can't beat that white dress."

She turned to him again, once more the everyday Sheila.

"All right, old boy, we'll let it go at that. Forget it. And now I'll
tell you something: I wore this white dress--absolutely the plainest
thing I have--because I didn't want to come into a finery contest with
Miss Burnaby. And now let's look at the old dog. I'm afraid he'll have
to be shot."

Farwell put in an appearance after supper. It was plain that the big
engineer had not expected to find other guests; also that their
presence embarrassed him. Quite unused to dissembling his feelings, he
took no pains to hide his dislike for Dunne. Casey, on the other hand,
was polite, suave, quiet, wearing the mocking smile that invariably
exasperated the engineer.

"You and Mr. Farwell are not friends," Clyde ventured on the way home.

"He doesn't think much of me," Casey admitted. "I rub him the wrong
way."

"As you were doing to-night."

"Was I?"

"You know you were. Is there a private quarrel between you, apart from
the water matter?"

"Not exactly. But it would come to that if we saw much of each other."

"Then I hope you won't. It's embarrassing to others."

"I'm awfully sorry. It was very bad form, of course. But somehow I
couldn't help it."

"Never mind. The McCraes are affected by this water trouble, aren't
they?"

"As much as I am. You are surprised that Farwell goes there. I have
never mentioned it to them, nor they to me. It's none of my business."

"Nor of mine."

"I didn't mean that."

"I know you didn't. Still, I think I could guess why Mr. Farwell goes
to Talapus."

"So could I," said Casey dryly, and the subject dropped.

But Kitty Wade came to Clyde's room for a chat before retiring. "Those
McCraes," she said, "are very nice. Mr. McCrae is one of the real
pioneers. He told us some of the most interesting things. How did you
like Miss McCrae?"

"I think she's a very nice, sensible girl. Good-looking, too."

"H'm!" said Kitty Wade. "Yes, I think she is. Dresses nicely and
simply. No imitation fine things. Shows the correct instinct. You and
she might have been having a plain-clothes competition."

Clyde did not respond. Kitty Wade resumed, after a brief pause: "I'll
tell you one thing, Clyde; this man Farwell is in love with her."

"I could see that, Kitty."

"And she doesn't care for him."

"I thought that, too."

"I wonder," Kitty Wade went on, "if there is anything between her and
Mr. Dunne? Do you suppose he and Mr. Farwell are jealous of each other?
They were like two dogs with one bone."

Clyde yawned. "Oh, mercy, Kitty," she said wearily, "ask me something
easier. I wouldn't blame either of them. She seems to be a thoroughly
nice girl."

Kitty Wade on her way to her room nodded wisely. "You don't fool me a
little bit, Clyde," she said to herself. "This Sheila McCrae is
probably just as nice as you are, and you own up to it like a little
lady. But all the same you hate each other; and, what's more, you both
know it."