CHAPTER I


Miss Nita Hess flattened a snub nose against the Pullman window, and
stared at the expressionless face of the plains with an avidity to be
explained only by the fact that her acquaintance with them up to then
had been principally through the medium of light literature perused
surreptitiously in a select school for young ladies in the extreme
East. But her remarks from time to time would have shocked the
ultra-correct preceptresses of that excellent seat of learning.

"Oh, gee, Clyde," she exclaimed suddenly, "look at the cute little
deer! Oh, see 'em scoot!"

Her companion glanced from the window, and stifled a yawn. "Antelope,"
she commented, without interest. "Yes, I see them, Nita," and leaned
back again, closing her eyes.

In fact, Miss Clyde Burnaby was bored by the journey, and a little--a
very little--by her fifteen-year-old cousin, daughter of the celebrated
James C. Hess, of the equally celebrated Hess Railway System. Nita was
a good little girl, and a nice little girl--in spite of occasional
lingual lapses--but only a sense of duty to dear old Uncle Jim had
induced Clyde to forego her European trip that she might accompany Nita
to the Pacific coast for the benefit of that young lady's health, which
Clyde privately considered as sound as the national currency system.

In a democratic moment she had refused Hess' offer of a private car,
and she now rather regretted it. She had a headache, and the great
coils of red-gold hair seemed to weigh tons. It would have been a
relief to have it taken down and brushed by a deft-fingered maid. But
the maid also had been left behind. And that, she decided, was a
mistake, also.

Clyde Burnaby was alone in the world. Her father's modest fortune,
under the able management of his executor, Jim Hess, had expanded
wonderfully. So far as money was concerned, no reasonable wish of hers
need remain ungratified. She was accomplished, travelled, and very
good-looking. She had refused half a dozen offers of hands, hearts,
and fortunes--the latter equal to her own--and also two titles
unaccompanied by fortunes, with hearts as doubtful collateral. She
kept her own bachelor establishment in Chicago, gave to charity with
discretion, took a quiet part in the social life of her set, dabbled
in art and literature, had a few good friends, and was generally
considered a very lucky, amiable, and handsome young woman.

But just then she was bored with the trip and with Nita, whose
enthusiasms she could not share. The heat of the Pullman seemed
stifling, the odour of coal unbearable. The land was dead-brown, flat,
dreary, monotonous. Leaning back with closed eyes, she longed for the
deck of a liner, the strong, salt breezes, the steady pulse of the
engines--even for cold rain from a gray sky, sullen, shouldering seas,
and the whip of spindrift on her cheeks. Beside her Nita prattled
steadily.

"We're going to stop, Clyde. Here's a station. Look at the yard with
all the cows in it. I wonder if those men are cowboys. They don't look
like the pictures. But isn't it funny how those ponies stand with the
reins hanging down and not tied at all? I wish _my_ pony would stand
that way. Here come two men on horseback. My, but they're riding fast!
I wonder if they are trying to catch the train?"

Two blown ponies bore down on the station at a dead run. One of the
riders jumped off and ran for the office. The other unstrapped a
bundle, apparently mostly slicker, from his companion's saddle cantle.
In a moment the first emerged. The energetic Nita had opened the
window, and Clyde overheard their conversation.

"I'm shy my grip," said the first. "The agent doesn't know where she
is, and I can't wait. Round up Rosebud soon as you can, and find out
what's become of it."

The other swore frankly at Rosebud, who appeared to be an individual.
"I'll bet he's drunk, somewheres. I'll express your war bag when I find
it."

The engine bell clanged a warning, and the conductor shouted
cryptically. The two men shook hands.

"So long, Joe," said the younger. "I've had a whale of a time. Come up
to my country and see me next year. Come any old time. We'll bust
things wide open for you."

The other grinned widely. "The missus ain't lettin' me range like I
used to. So long. Keep sober, old-timer. Don't play none with
strangers. Say, d'you remember the time when we----"

Clyde lost the remainder in the shudder and grind of the trucks as the
coaches began to move. The two men disappeared from her field of
vision. Nita closed the window. Once more she leaned back, resigning
herself to the weariness of the journey.

But a moment afterward the man of the platform appeared at the end of
the aisle, accompanied by the porter who carried his bundle. Instantly
he became the cynosure of a battery of disapproving eyes.

For his apparel would have been more in place in the bare colonist cars
of the first section than in the vestibuled, luxurious rear coaches of
the second. From the battered and stained old pony hat on his head to
the disreputable laced boots into which his trousers were shoved, he
was covered with the gray dust of the plains. Apart from his costume
and the top dressing of dust, he was tall, cleanly built, and evidently
as hard as a wire nail. His hair missed red by the merest fraction, and
his eyes were a clear blue, level and direct. He moved as lightly as a
prowling animal, and he met the supercilious and disdainful glances of
his fellow passengers with a half smile of amused comprehension.

The porter, with a deference betokening an unusually large advance tip,
ushered him to a seat across the aisle from Clyde's. But the stranger,
catching a glimpse of himself in the panel mirror, stopped suddenly.
Instantly Clyde's nostrils were assailed by a strong odour of leather
and horseflesh. She shuddered in spite of herself. It was the last
straw. As a rule she was not overparticular, but just then she was in
that state of nerves when little things fretted her. She said to
herself that a cattle car was the proper place for this young man. As
he spoke to the porter she listened resentfully, prepared to disapprove
of anything he might say. Said he:

"Mistuh Washin'ton Jeffe'son Bones, look at me carefully. Do you see
any dust upon my garments?"

"Yassuh, yassuh," chuckled the porter. "Don't see much else, suh."

"And could you--on a bet of about a dollar--undertake to put me in a
condition not to damage the seats?"

"Yassuh; sho' could, suh!"

"Go to it, then," said the stranger. "I'm after you."

He did not return for an hour. Then he was noticeably cleaner, and the
odour of horse was replaced by that of cigars, less objectionable to
Clyde. As he took his seat he glanced at her frankly, a shade of
drollery in his eye, as if he were quite aware of her disapproval, and
was amused by it. She stiffened a trifle, ignoring him utterly. Not by
a hair's breadth would she encourage this free-and-easy person.

For some hours she had been annoyed by the behaviour of a man several
seats away. Whenever she had glanced in his direction he had been
looking at her. Once he had smiled ingratiatingly. Clyde's life had not
included first-hand experiences of this kind, but she was able to
classify the man accurately. Still, there had been nothing definite to
complain of. Now this individual arose and came down the aisle. In his
hand was a book. He halted by her side.

"Beg pardon," said he. "Would you care to look at this?"

"No, thank you," she replied frigidly.

"It isn't bad," he persisted. "I'll leave it with you."

"Thank you, I don't want it," said Clyde. But nevertheless he dropped
the volume in her lap, smiling offensively.

"Look it over," said he. "I'll get it later."

Paying no attention to her indignant refusal, he walked down the aisle
to the smoking compartment. Clyde, a bright spot of anger on either
cheek, turned to Nita.

"I think I shall speak to the conductor."

"It's because you're so pretty," said Nita, with an air of vast
experience. "I've had the same thing, almost, happen to me. Back at
college--in the town, I mean--there was a boy----But perhaps I'd better
not say anything about it. He was very bold indeed!" She pursed her
lips primly, but her eyes belied their expression.

"I beg your pardon," said the man across the aisle.

Once more Clyde froze indignantly. Never before had she felt the need
of an escort in her travels. Never again, she told herself, would she
travel alone with merely a fifteen-year-old kid for her sole companion.
She honoured the new offender with a haughty stare. He smiled
unaffectedly.

"Nothing like that," he disclaimed, as if he had read her thoughts.
"I'll take that book if you don't want it. He can get it back from me."

He stretched a long arm across, and thanked her as she handed him the
book mechanically. Forthwith he opened it, and began to read. And he
was still absorbed in it when the donor returned.

That gentleman paused uncertainly beside Clyde, who was haughtily
unconscious of his presence.

"Did you--er----" he began.

At that moment the man across the aisle twitched his coat sleeve.
"Looking for the book you left with me?" he asked casually. "Here it
is."

The other stared at him in uneasy surprise. "I didn't----"

"Oh, yes, you did," the man across the aisle interrupted. "Anyway, you
meant to. You'll remember if you think a minute. You didn't leave it
with that young lady, because you don't know her, and you're not the
kind of man to butt in where you're not wanted. Now, are you?"

"Of course not," the other replied, with a show of indignation. "I
don't know----"

"Then that's all right," said the stranger quietly. "Here's your book.
And there's your seat. And don't make any more mistakes."

The gregarious gentleman accepted this advice and his book meekly.
Thereafter he avoided even looking in Clyde's direction. To her relief
the stranger did not presume on the service he had rendered. He
stretched his long legs upon the opposite seat, leaned back, and gazed
silently at the roof. The afternoon dragged on. Clyde and Nita went to
the diner and returned. Afterward the stranger presumably did likewise,
spending a decent interval in the smoker. Darkness fell, and the
Limited thundered on westward across the plains to the country of the
foothills, the mountain ranges, and its goal at the thither end of the
Pacific slope.

Suddenly, with a scream of air and a grinding of brake shoes, the train
came to a stop. Clyde looked out. The level, monotonous plains were no
longer there. The country was rolling, studded with clumps of
cottonwoods. The moon, close to the full, touched the higher spots with
silver, intensifying the blackness of the shadows.

Clyde peered ahead to the limit of her restricted area of vision, for
the lights of a station or a town. There was none. Not even the lighted
square of a ranch-house window broke the night. Five minutes passed,
ten, and still the train remained motionless. Suddenly, at the forward
end of the coach, appeared the porter. Followed the occupants of the
smoking compartment, each with his hands on the shoulders of the man in
front of him in impromptu lockstep. Behind them came an apparition
which caused the passengers, after a first gasp of incredulity, to vent
their feelings in masculine oaths and little feminine screams of alarm.

This intruder was a large man, powerfully built. His hat was shoved
back from his forehead, but his face was concealed by a square of dark
cloth, cut with eyeholes. In his right hand he dandled with easy
familiarity an exceedingly long-barrelled revolver. His left hand
rested upon the twin of it, in a holster at his thigh. At his shoulder
was another man, similarly masked.

"Everybody sit quiet!" the first commanded crisply. "Gents will hook
their fingers on top of their heads, and keep them there. No call to be
frightened, ladies, 'long's the men show sense. My partner will pass
along the contribution bag. No holding out, and no talk. And just
remember I'll get the first man that makes a move."

Clyde had joined in the gasp of surprise, but she had not screamed.
Nita was trembling with excitement.

"I wouldn't have missed it for worlds!" the girl whispered. "Oh, Clyde,
isn't he a duck of a holdup? Will there be shooting? Haven't any of
these men got any nerve?"

Clyde became aware that the man in the seat opposite was speaking to
her out of the corner of his mouth, his hands prudently crossed on his
pate.

"If you have anything of special value--rings, watch, that sort of
stuff--get rid of it. Put it on the floor if you can, and kick it under
the seat ahead. Don't cache it in your own seat. Give him what money
you have--that's what he wants. Tell the kid next you to do the same.
And don't be nervous. You're as safe as if you were at home."

Clyde wore no rings. The few articles of jewellery she had brought with
her were already safely concealed beyond the masculine ken of any mere
train robber. But her watch was suspended around her neck by a thin
gold chain. The watch could be detached, but the chain itself must be
lifted over the head; and that would attract attention. To leave the
chain would be to admit the existence of the watch. Without an
instant's hesitation she tugged sharply. The frail links broke.
Lowering the watch to the floor of the car, she shoved it forward with
her foot.

Meanwhile the second masked man was making swift progress down the
aisle. In his left hand was a gunny sack, in his right a formidable
six-shooter. He was a gentleman of humorous turn, and he indulged in
jocose remarks as he went, which, however, fell on an unappreciative
audience. Because time pressed he did not attempt to skin each victim
clean. He took what he could get, and passed on to the next; but he
took everything in sight, and, moreover, each man was forced to turn
his pockets inside out. This brought to light several pocket-edition
firearms, which likewise went into the bag. With infinite humour he
declared his intention of taking them home to his children. They were
toys, he explained, with which the darlings could not hurt themselves.

"Thank you, miss," was his acknowledgment of the roll of bills which
Clyde handed him. "You're sure an example to a lot o' these tinhorn
sports. I reckon you got some pretty stones cached somewheres too, but
I won't force your hand, seein's you've acted like a little lady. Just
get up till I look at the seat. Now, partner"--he turned on the man
across the aisle--"it's you to sweeten!"

That individual produced a very attenuated roll. "Sorry I can't go to
the centre any stronger, old-timer. You've got me at the wrong end
between pay days."

"Huh!" The holdup eyed him suspiciously. "Keep your hands stric'ly away
from your pockets for a minute." He slapped them in quick succession.
"No gun," said he, "and that's lucky for both of us, maybe. Business is
business, partner, but I hate to set an old-timer afoot complete. Keep
out about ten for smokes and grub."

"Yours truly," responded the other. "When you land in the calaboose for
this racket I'll keep you in tobacco. What name shall I ask for?"

"If I land there you can ask for a damfool--and I'll answer the first
time," laughed the holdup over his shoulder. "Next gent! Here's the
little bag. Lady, keep your weddin' ring. You fat sport, stand up till
I see what you're sittin' on. Why, was you tryin' to hatch out that
bunch of money? I'll surely do that incubatin' myself."

He levied tribute swiftly, in spite of his badinage, and the gunny sack
sagged heavier and heavier. As he reached the end, his companion, who
had dominated the passengers with his gun, abandoned his position and
came down the aisle. At the rear door he turned.

"Keep your seats till the train moves," he ordered harshly. "I'm layin'
for the first man that sticks his head out of this car."

Behind him the coach buzzed like a disturbed hive. Its occupants
bewailed their losses, vowed vengeance on both holdups and railway.
Women reproached men with cowardice. Men told each other what they
would have done if---- But not one attempted to leave his seat.

Nita turned to Clyde with sparkling eyes. "And now I've been in a
holdup!" she exclaimed. "Won't that be a thing to tell the girls? Were
you frightened, Clyde? _I_ wasn't."

"I don't think so," Clyde replied. "I'm glad we saved our watches." The
words recalled the man across the aisle. He was leaning back, listening
to odd bits of conversation, a smile of amusement on his face. Clyde
leaned across.

"I want to thank you," she said. "We should never have thought of
hiding our watches."

He nodded pleasantly. "No, not likely. I hope you didn't lose much
money. He left me ten dollars. I don't want to be misunderstood, but
that's very much at your service until you can get more."

"And what shall you do--till pay day?" she asked, obeying a sudden
mischievous impulse.

"Oh, I'll worry along," he replied. His long arm stretched across, and
a ten-dollar bill fell in her lap.

"No, no," she said, "I was joking. I have plenty----"

She stopped suddenly. Somewhere toward the head of the train a revolver
barked, and barked again. Then came a staccato fusillade.

Swiftly the man across the aisle reached for his bundle, tore it open,
and plucked from it a long-barrelled, flat-handled, venomous automatic
pistol and a box of cartridges. He slid out the clip, snapped it back,
and went down the car in long pantherlike bounds, bending half double.

Up forward the shooting, which had ceased, began again. Suddenly there
broke into it the voice of another weapon, rapid and sustained as the
roll of an alarm clock. Other guns chimed in. A miniature battle seemed
to be in progress. And then it died. An occasional shot came from the
distance. Silence ensued.

Men whose curiosity got the better of prudence left the car and
returned. The train robbers were gone. It was thought that two or three
were wounded. It was the express messenger who had started the
shooting. He had got loose, somehow, in his rifled car, got a gun from
a drawer, and opened fire. He was shot through the shoulder. A brave
fellow, that. The company should do something for him. Two others of
the train crew were hit.

Clyde awaited the return of the man across the aisle. The train began
to move, gathered way, and thundered on. Still he did not return. The
porter began to make up the berths. To him she applied for information.
He knew nothing. The conductor was in equal ignorance. Inquiries
throughout the train were fruitless. The man of the seat across the
aisle was not forthcoming. His few belongings, which threw no light on
his identity, were gathered up to await his appearance. It was
suggested, to Clyde's indignation, that he was an accomplice of the
robbers, but in what manner was not clear.

And so Clyde Burnaby went on to the coast with ten dollars which she
did not in the least need. She neither saw nor heard more of their
owner; but, though it was unlikely she should meet him again, she kept
the identical bill. On her return she tucked it away in a drawer in her
writing desk; and when occasionally she noticed it there it was merely
to wonder, with some self-reproach, how its owner had fared until the
next pay day.