CHAPTER VII

Berkeley Fresno was devoting himself to Miss Blake.

"What do you think of our decorations?" she inquired.

"They are more or less athletic," he declared. "Was it Mr.
Speed's idea?"

"Yes. He wanted training-quarters."

"It's a joke, isn't it?"

"I don't think so. Mr. Fresno, why do you dislike Mr. Speed?"

Fresno bent a warm glance upon the questioner. "Don't you know?"

Helen shook her head with bland innocence. "Then you _do_
dislike him?"

"No, indeed! _I_ like him--he makes me laugh." Helen bridled
loyally. "Did you see those medals he wore yesterday?" the young
man queried.

"Of course, and I thought them beautiful."

"How were they inscribed? He wouldn't let me examine them."

"Naturally. If I had trophies like that I would guard them too."

Fresno nodded, musingly. "I gave mine away."

"Oh, are you an athlete?"

"No, but I timed a foot-race once. They gave me a beautiful
nearly-bronze emblem so that I could get into the infield."

"And did you win?"

"No! no! I didn't run! Don't you understand? I was an official."
Fresno was vexed at the girl's lack of perception. "I'm not an
athlete, Miss Blake. I'm just an ordinary sort of a chap." He led
her to a seat, while Jean enlisted the aid of Larry Glass and
completed the finishing touches to the decorations. "Athletics
don't do a fellow any good after he leaves college. I'm going
into business this fall. Have you ever been to California?" Miss
Blake admitted that she had never been so far, and Fresno
launched himself upon a glowing description of his native State;
but before he could shape the conversation to a point where his
hearer might perchance express a desire to see its wonders, Still
Bill Stover thrust his head cautiously through the door to the
bunk-house, and allowed an admiring eye to rove over the
transformation.

"Looks like a bazaar!" he exclaimed. "What's the idea?"

"Trainin'-quarters," said Glass.

"Mr. Speed goin' to _live_ here?" inquired the foreman,
bringing the remainder of his lanky body into view.

"No, indeed," Jean corrected, "he will merely use this room to
train in."

"How do you train in a room?" Stover asked her.

"Why, you--just train, I suppose." Miss Chapin turned to Glass.
"How does a person train in a room?"

"Why, he--just trains, that's all. A guy can't train without
trainin'-quarters, can he?"

"We thought it would make a nice gymnasium," offered Miss Blake.

"Looks like business." Stover's admiration was keen. "I rode over
to Gallagher's place last night and laid our bets."

"How much have you wagered?" asked Fresno.

"More'n we can afford to lose."

"But you aren't going to lose," Miss Blake said,
enthusiastically.

"I got Gallagher to play some records for me."

"_Silas on Fifth Avenue?_"

"Sure! And _The Holy City_, too! Willie stayed out by the
barb-wire fence; he didn't dast to go in. When I come out I found
him ready to cry. That desperado has sure got the heart of a
woman. I reckon he'd commit a murder for that phonograph--he's so
full of sentiment."

Fresno spoke sympathetically.

"It's a fortunate thing for you fellows that Speed came when he
did. I'm anxious for him to beat this cook, and I hate to see him
so careless with his training."

"Careless!" cried Helen.

"What's he done?" inquired Stover.

"Nothing, so far. That's the trouble. He's sure he can win, but"
--Fresno shook his head, doubtfully--"there's such a thing as
overconfidence. No matter how good a man may be, he should take
care of himself."

"What's wrong with his trainin'?" demanded Glass.

"I think he ought to have more rest. It's too noisy around the
house; he can't get enough sleep."

"Nor anybody else," agreed Glass, meaningly; "there's too much
singin'."

"That's funny," said Stover. "Music soothes me, no matter how bad
it is. Last night when we come back from the Centipede Mr. Fresno
was singin' _Dearie_, but I dozed right off in the middle of
it. An' it's the same way with cattle. They like it. It's part of
a man's duty when he's night-ridin' a herd to pizen the
atmosphere with melody."

"What I mean to say is this," Fresno hastened to explain. "We
keep late hours at the house, whereas an athlete ought to retire
early and arise with the sun. I thought it would be a good scheme
to have Mr. Speed sleep out here until the race is over, where he
won't be disturbed. Nine o'clock is bedtime for a man in
training."

"Oh, I don't think that is at all necessary," said Miss Blake
quickly.

"We can't afford to spoil his chances," argued the young man.
"There is too much at stake. Am I right, Mr. Glass?"

Now, like most fat men, Lawrence Glass was fond of his rest, and
since his arrival at the Flying Heart his sleeping-hours had been
shortened considerably, so for once he agreed with the
Californian. "No question about it," said he. "And I'll sleep
here with him if you'll put a couple of cots in the place."

"But suppose Mr. Speed won't do it?" questioned Miss Blake.

"You ask him, and he won't refuse," said Jean.

"We don't want to see him defeated," urged Helen's other suitor;
at which the girl rose, saying doubtfully:

"Of course I'll do my best, if you think it's really important."

"Thank you," said Stover gratefully, while Fresno congratulated
himself upon an easy victory. "I'll ask him at once, but you must
come along, Jean, and you too, Mr. Glass."

The two girls took Speed's trainer with them, and went forth in
search of the young man.

"It's up to you fellows to see that he gets to bed early," said
Fresno, when he and Stover were alone.

"Leave it to us. And as for gettin' up, we turn out at daylight.
I don't reckon he could sleep none after that if he tried."
Stover pointed to the striped elastic coils of the exerciser
against the wall. "I didn't want to speak about it while they was
here," said he, "but one of them young ladies lost her garters."

"That's not a pair of garters, that's a chest-weight."

"Jest wait for what?"

"Chest-weight--chest-developer."

"Oh!" Stover examined the device curiously, "I thought a chest-
developer came in a bottle."

Fresno explained the operation of the apparatus, at which the
cow-man remarked, admiringly: "That young feller is all right,
ain't he?"

"Think so?"

"Sure! Don't you?"

Fresno explained his doubts by a crafty lift of his brows and a
shrug. "I thought so--at first."

Stover wheeled upon him abruptly. "What's wrong?"

"Oh, nothing."

After a pause the foreman remarked, vaguely, "He's the
intercollegit champeen of Yale."

"Oh no, hardly that, or I would have heard of him."

"Ain't he no champeen?"

"Champion of the running broad smile and the half-mile talk
perhaps."

"Ain't he a foot-runner?"

"Perhaps. I've never seen him run, but I have my doubts."

"Good Lord!" moaned Stover, weakly.

"He may be the best sprinter in the country, mind you, but I'll
lay a little bet that he can't run a hundred yards without
sustenance."

"Without what?"

"Sustenance--something to eat."

"Well, we've got plenty for him to eat," said the mystified
foreman.

"You don't understand. However, time will tell."

"But we ain't got no time. We've made this race 'pay or play,' a
week from Saturday, and the bets are down. We was afraid the
Centipede would welsh when they seen who we had, so we framed it
that-away. What's to be done?"

Again Fresno displayed an artistic restraint that was admirable.
"It's none of my business," said he, with a careless shrug.

"I--I guess I'll tell Willie and the boys," vouchsafed Bill
apprehensively.

"No! no! Don't breathe a word I've said to you. He may be a
crackerjack, and I wouldn't do him an injustice for the world.
All the same, I wish he hadn't broken my stop-watch."

"D'you think he broke it a-purpose?"

"What do you think?"

Stover mopped the sweat from his brow.

"Can't we time him with a ordinary watch?"

"Sure. We can take yours. It won't be exact, but--"

"I ain't got no watch. I bet mine last night at the Centipede.
Willie's got one, though."

"Mind you, he may be all right," Fresno repeated, reassuringly;
then hearing the object of their discussion approaching with his
trainer, the two strolled out through the bunk-room, Stover a
prey to a new-born suspicion, Fresno musing to himself that
diplomacy was not a lost art.

"You're a fine friend, you are!" Speed exploded, when he and
Glass were inside the gymnasium. "What made you say 'yes'?"

"I had to."

"Rot, Larry! You played into Fresno's hands deliberately! Now
I've got to spend my evenings in bed while he sits in the hammock
and sings _Dearie_." He shook his head gloomily. "Who knows
what may happen?"

"It will do you good to get some sleep, Wally."

"But I don't want to sleep!" cried the exasperated suitor. "I
want to make love. Do you think I came all the way from New York
to sleep? I can do that at Yale."

"Take it from me, Bo, you've got plenty of time to win that dame.
Eight hours is a workin' day anywhere."

"My dear fellow, the union hours for courting don't begin until 9
P.M. I've got myself into a fine mess, haven't I? Just when Night
spreads her sable mantle and Dan Cupid strings up his bow, I must
forsake my lady-love and crawl into the hay. Oh, you're a good
trainer!"

"You'd better can some of this love-talk and think more about
foot-racin'."

"It can't be done! Nine o'clock! The middle of the afternoon.
It's rather funny, though, isn't it?" Speed was not the sort to
cherish even a real grievance for any considerable time. "If it
had happened to anybody else I'd laugh myself sick."

Glass chuckled. "The whole thing is a hit. Look at this joint,
for instance." He took in their surroundings with a comprehensive
gesture. "It looks about as much like a gymnasium as I look like
a contortionist. Why don't you get a Morris chair and a
mandolin?"

"There are two reasons," said Speed, facetiously. "First, it
takes an athlete to get out of a Morris chair; and, second, a
mandolin has proved to be many a young man's ruin."

Glass examined the bow of ribbon upon the lonesome piece of
exercising apparatus.

"It looks like the trainin'-stable for the Colonial Dames. What a
yelp this place would be to Covington or any other athlete."

"It is not an athletic gymnasium." Speed smiled as he lighted a
cigarette. "It is a romantic gymnasium. As Socrates once
observed--"

"Socrates! I'm hep to him," Glass interrupted, quickly. "I
trained a Greek professor once and got wised up on all that
stuff. Socrates was the--the Hemlock Kid."

"Exactly! As Socrates, the Hemlock Kid, deftly put it, '_In hoc
signature vintage_.'"

"I don't get you."

"That is archaic Scandinavian, and, translated, means, 'Love
cannot thrive without her bower.'"

"No answer to that telegram yet, eh?"

"Hardly time."

"Better wire Covington again, hadn't you? Mebbe he didn't get
it?"

"I promised Mrs. Keap that I would, but--" Speed lost himself
abruptly in speculation, for he did not know exactly how to
manage this unexpected complication. Of one thing only was he
certain: it would require some thought.

"Say, Wally, suppose Covington don't come?"

"Then I shall sprain my ankle," said the other. "Hello! What in
the world--" Still Bill Stover and Willie came into the room
carrying an armful of lumber. Behind them followed Carara with a
huge wooden tub, and Cloudy rolling a kerosene barrel.

"Where do you want it, gents?" inquired the foreman.

"Where do we want what?"

"The shower-bath."

"Shower--I didn't order a shower-bath!"

"No; but we aim to make it as pleasant for you as we can."

"If there is anything I abhor, it's a shower-bath!" exclaimed the
athlete.

"You just got to have one. Mr. Fresno said all this gymnasium
lacked was a shower-bath, a pair of scales, and a bulletin-board.
He said you'd sure need a bath after workin' that chest-
developer. We ain't got no scales, nor no board, but we'll toggle
up some sort of a bath for you. The blacksmith's makin' a
squirter to go on the bar'l."

"Very well, put it wherever you wish. I sha'n't use it."

"I wouldn't overlook nothin', if I was you," said Willie, in even
milder tones than Stover had used.

"You overwhelm me with these little attentions," retorted Mr.
Speed.

"Where you goin' to run to-day?" inquired the first speaker.

"I don't know. Why?"

"We thought you might do a hundred yards agin time."

"Nix!" interposed Glass, hurriedly. "I can't let him overdo at
the start. Besides, we ain't got no stop-watch."

"I got a reg'lar watch," said Willie, "and I can catch you pretty
close. We'd admire to see you travel some, Mr. Speed."

But Glass vowed that he was in charge of his protege's health,
and would not permit it. Once outside, however, he exclaimed:
"That's more of Fresno's work, Wally! I tell you, he's Jerry.
He'll rib them pirates to clock you, and if they do--well, you'd
better keep runnin', that's all."

"You can do me a favor," said Speed. "Buy that watch."

"There's other watches on the farm."

"Buy them all, and bring me the bill."

Before setting out on his daily grind, Speed announced to his
trainer that he had decided to take him along for company, and
when that corpulent gentleman rebelled on the ground that the day
was too sultry, his employer would have none of it, so together
they trotted away later in the morning, Speed in his silken suit,
Glass running flat-footed and with great effort. But once safely
hidden from view, they dropped into a walk, and selecting a
favorable resting-place, paused. Speed lighted a cigarette, Glass
produced a deck of cards from his pocket, and they played seven-
up. Having covered five miles in this exhausting fashion, they
returned to the ranch in time for luncheon. Both ate heartily,
for the exercise had agreed with them.