CHAPTER V.


The camels, some brown and some white, were kneeling in a long line,
their champing jaws moving rhythmically from side to side, and their
gracefully poised heads turning to right and left in a mincing,
self-conscious fashion. Most of them were beautiful creatures, true
Arabian trotters, with the slim limbs and finely turned necks which mark
the breed; but among them were a few of the slower, heavier beasts, with
ungroomed skins, disfigured by the black scars of old firings. These
were loaded with the doora and the waterskins of the raiders, but a few
minutes sufficed to redistribute their loads and to make place for the
prisoners. None of these had been bound with the exception of Mr.
Stuart--for the Arabs, understanding that he was a clergyman, and
accustomed to associate religion with violence, had looked upon his
fierce outburst as quite natural, and regarded him now as the most
dangerous and enterprising of their captives. His hands were therefore
tied together with a plaited camel-halter, but the others, including the
dragoman and the two wounded blacks, were allowed to mount without any
precaution against their escape, save that which was afforded by the
slowness of their beasts. Then, with a shouting of men and a roaring of
camels, the creatures were jolted on to their legs, and the long,
straggling procession set off with its back to the homely river, and its
face to the shimmering, violet haze, which hung round the huge sweep of
beautiful, terrible desert, striped tiger-fashion with black rock and
with golden sand.

None of the white prisoners, with the exception of Colonel Cochrane, had
ever been upon a camel before. It seemed an alarming distance to the
ground when they looked down, and the curious swaying motion, with the
insecurity of the saddle, made them sick and frightened. But their
bodily discomfort was forgotten in the turmoil of bitter thoughts
within. What a chasm gaped between their old life and their new! And
yet how short was the time and space which divided them! Less than an
hour ago they had stood upon the summit of that rock, and had laughed
and chattered, or grumbled at the heat and flies, becoming peevish at
small discomforts. Headingly had been hypercritical over the tints of
Nature. They could not forget his own tint as he lay with his cheek
upon the black stone. Sadie had chattered about tailor-made dresses and
Parisian chiffons. Now she was clinging, half-crazy, to the pommel of a
wooden saddle, with suicide rising as a red star of hope in her mind.
Humanity, reason, argument--all were gone, and there remained the brutal
humiliation of force. And all the time, down there by the second rocky
point, their steamer was waiting for them--their saloon, with the white
napery and the glittering glasses, the latest novel, and the London
papers. The least imaginative of them could see it so clearly: the
white awning, Mrs. Shlesinger with her yellow sun-hat, Mrs. Belmont
lying back in the canvas chair. There it lay almost in sight of them,
that little floating chip broken off from home, and every silent,
ungainly step of the camels was carrying them more hopelessly away from
it. That very morning how beneficent Providence had appeared, how
pleasant was life!--a little commonplace, perhaps, but so soothing and
restful. And now!

The red head-gear, patched jibbehs, and yellow boots had already shown
to the Colonel that these men were no wandering party of robbers, but a
troop from the regular army of the Khalifa. Now, as they struck across
the desert, they showed that they possessed the rude discipline which
their work demanded. A mile ahead, and far out on either flank, rode
their scouts, dipping and rising among the yellow sand-hills. Ali Wad
Ibrahim headed the caravan, and his short, sturdy lieutenant brought up
the rear. The main party straggled over a couple of hundred yards, and
in the middle was the little, dejected clump of prisoners. No attempt
was made to keep them apart, and Mr. Stephens soon contrived that his
camel should be between those of the two ladies.

“Don’t be down-hearted, Miss Adams,” said he. “This is a most
indefensible outrage, but there can be no question that steps will be
taken in the proper quarter to set the matter right. I am convinced
that we shall be subjected to nothing worse than a temporary
inconvenience. If it had not been for that villain Mansoor, you need
not have appeared at all.”

It was shocking to see the change in the little Bostonian lady, for she
had shrunk to an old woman in an hour. Her swarthy cheeks had fallen
in, and her eyes shone wildly from sunken, darkened sockets.
Her frightened glances were continually turned upon Sadie. There is
surely some wrecker angel which can only gather her best treasures in
moments of disaster. For here were all these worldlings going to their
doom, and already frivolity and selfishness had passed away from them,
and each was thinking and grieving only for the other. Sadie thought of
her aunt, her aunt thought of Sadie, the men thought of the women,
Belmont thought of his wife--and then he thought of something else also,
and he kicked his camel’s shoulder with his heel, until he found himself
upon the near side of Miss Adams.

“I’ve got something for you here,” he whispered. “We may be separated
soon, so it is as well to make our arrangements.”

“Separated!” wailed Miss Adams.

“Don’t speak loud, for that infernal Mansoor may give us away again.
I hope it won’t be so, but it might. We must be prepared for the worst.
For example, they might determine to get rid of us men and to keep you.”

Miss Adams shuddered.

“What am I to do? For God’s sake tell me what I am to do, Mr. Belmont!
I am an old woman. I have had my day. I could stand it if it was only
myself. But Sadie--I am clean crazed when I think of her. There’s her
mother waiting at home, and I--” She clasped her thin hands together in
the agony of her thoughts.

“Put your hand out under your dust-cloak,” said Belmont, sidling his
camel up against hers. “Don’t miss your grip of it. There! Now hide
it in your dress, and you’ll always have a key to unlock any door.”

Miss Adams felt what it was which he had slipped into her hand, and she
looked at him for a moment in bewilderment. Then she pursed up her lips
and shook her stern, brown face in disapproval. But she pushed the
little pistol into its hiding-place, all the same, and she rode with her
thoughts in a whirl. Could this indeed be she, Eliza Adams, of Boston,
whose narrow, happy life had oscillated between the comfortable house in
Commonwealth Avenue and the Tremont Presbyterian Church? Here she was,
hunched upon a camel, with her hand upon the butt of a pistol, and her
mind weighing the justifications of murder. Oh, life, sly, sleek,
treacherous life, how are we ever to trust you? Show us your worst and
we can face it, but it is when you are sweetest and smoothest that we
have most to fear from you.

“At the worst, Miss Sadie, it will only be a question of ransom,” said
Stephens, arguing against his own convictions. “Besides, we are still
close to Egypt, far away from the Dervish country. There is sure to be
an energetic pursuit. You must try not to lose your courage, and to
hope for the best.”

“No, I am not scared, Mr. Stephens,” said Sadie, turning towards him a
blanched face which belied her words. “We’re all in God’s hands, and
surely He won’t be cruel to us. It is easy to talk about trusting Him
when things are going well, but now is the real test. If He’s up there
behind that blue heaven--”

“He is,” said a voice behind them, and they found that the Birmingham
clergyman had joined the party. His tied hands clutched on to his
Makloofa saddle, and his fat body swayed dangerously from side to side
with every stride of the camel. His wounded leg was oozing with blood
and clotted with flies, and the burning desert sun beat down upon his
bare head, for he had lost both hat and umbrella in the scuffle.
A rising fever flecked his large, white cheeks with a touch of colour,
and brought a light into his brown ox-eyes. He had always seemed a
somewhat gross and vulgar person to his fellow-travellers. Now, this
bitter healing draught of sorrow had transformed him. He was purified,
spiritualised, exalted. He had become so calmly strong that he made the
others feel stronger as they looked upon him. He spoke of life and of
death, of the present, and their hopes of the future; and the black
cloud of their misery began to show a golden rift or two. Cecil Brown
shrugged his shoulders, for he could not change in an hour the
convictions of his life; but the others, even Fardet, the Frenchman,
were touched and strengthened. They all took off their hats when he
prayed. Then the Colonel made a turban out of his red silk cummerbund,
and insisted that Mr. Stuart should wear it. With his homely dress and
gorgeous headgear, he looked like a man who has dressed up to amuse the
children.

And now the dull, ceaseless, insufferable torment of thirst was added to
the aching weariness which came from the motion of the camels. The sun
glared down upon them, and then up again from the yellow sand, and the
great plain shimmered and glowed until they felt as if they were riding
over a cooling sheet of molten metal. Their lips were parched and
dried, and their tongues like tags of leather. They lisped curiously in
their speech, for it was only the vowel sounds which would come without
an effort. Miss Adams’s chin had dropped upon her chest, and her great
hat concealed her face.

“Auntie will faint if she does not get water,” said Sadie. “Oh, Mr.
Stephens, is there nothing we could do?”

The Dervishes riding near were all Baggara with the exception of one
negro--an uncouth fellow with a face pitted with small-pox.
His expression seemed good-natured when compared with that of his Arab
comrades, and Stephens ventured to touch his elbow and to point to his
water-skin, and then to the exhausted lady. The negro shook his head
brusquely, but at the same time he glanced significantly towards the
Arabs, as if to say that, if it were not for them, he might act
differently. Then he laid his black forefinger upon the breast of his
jibbeh.

“Tippy Tilly,” said he.

“What’s that?” asked Colonel Cochrane.

“Tippy Tilly,” repeated the negro, sinking his voice as if he wished
only the prisoners to hear him.

The Colonel shook his head.

“My Arabic won’t bear much strain. I don’t know what he is saying,”
said he.

“Tippy Tilly. Hicks Pasha,” the negro repeated.

“I believe the fellow is friendly to us, but I can’t quite make him
out,” said Cochrane to Belmont. “Do you think that he means that his
name is Tippy Tilly, and that he killed Hicks Pasha?”

The negro showed his great white teeth at hearing his own words coming
back to him. “Aiwa!” said he. “Tippy Tilly--Bimbashi Mormer--Boum!”

“By Jove, I’ve got it!” cried Belmont. “He’s trying to speak English.
Tippy Tilly is as near as he can get to Egyptian Artillery. He has
served in the Egyptian Artillery under Bimbashi Mortimer. He was taken
prisoner when Hicks Pasha was destroyed, and had to turn Dervish to save
his skin. How’s that?”

The Colonel said a few words of Arabic and received a reply, but two of
the Arabs closed up, and the negro quickened his pace and left them.

“You are quite right,” said the Colonel. “The fellow is friendly to us,
and would rather fight for the Khedive than for the Khalifa. I don’t
know that he can do us any good, but I’ve been in worse holes than this,
and come out right side up. After all, we are not out of reach of
pursuit, and won’t be for another forty-eight hours.”

Belmont calculated the matter out in his slow, deliberate fashion.

“It was about twelve that we were on the rock,” said he. “They would
become alarmed aboard the steamer if we did not appear at two.”

“Yes,” the Colonel interrupted, “that was to be our lunch hour.
I remember saying that when I came back I would have--O Lord, it’s best
not to think of it!”

“The reis was a sleepy old crock,” Belmont continued, “but I have
absolute confidence in the promptness and decision of my wife.
She would insist upon an immediate alarm being given. Suppose they
started back at two-thirty, they should be at Halfa by three, since the
journey is down stream. How long did they say that it took to turn out
the Camel Corps?”

“Give them an hour.”

“And another hour to get them across the river. They would be at the
Abousir Rock and pick up the tracks by six o’clock. After that it is a
clear race. We are only four hours ahead, and some of these beasts are
very spent. We may be saved yet, Cochrane!”

“Some of us may. I don’t expect to see the padre alive to-morrow, nor
Miss Adams either. They are not made for this sort of thing either of
them. Then again we must not forget that these people have a trick of
murdering their prisoners when they see that there is a chance of a
rescue. See here, Belmont, in case you get back and I don’t, there’s a
matter of a mortgage that I want you to set right for me.” They rode on
with their shoulders inclined to each other, deep in the details of
business.

The friendly negro who had talked of himself as Tippy Tilly had managed
to slip a piece of cloth soaked in water into the hand of Mr. Stephens,
and Miss Adams had moistened her lips with it. Even the few drops had
given her renewed strength, and now that the first crushing shock was
over, her wiry, elastic, Yankee nature began to reassert itself.

“These people don’t look as if they would harm us, Mr. Stephens,” said
she. “I guess they have a working religion of their own, such as it is,
and that what’s wrong to us is wrong to them.”

Stephens shook his head in silence. He had seen the death of the
donkey-boys, and she had not.

“Maybe we are sent to guide them into a better path,” said the old lady.
“Maybe we are specially singled out for a good work among them.”

If it were not for her niece her energetic and enterprising temperament
was capable of glorying in the chance of evangelising Khartoum, and
turning Omdurman into a little well-drained broad-avenued replica of a
New England town.

“Do you know what I am thinking of all the time?” said Sadie.
“You remember that temple that we saw--when was it? Why, it was this
morning.”

They gave an exclamation of surprise, all three of them. Yes, it had
been this morning; and it seemed away and away in some dim past
experience of their lives, so vast was the change, so new and so
overpowering the thoughts which had come between. They rode in silence,
full of this strange expansion of time, until at last Stephens reminded
Sadie that she had left her remark unfinished.

“Oh yes; it was the wall picture on that temple that I was thinking of.
Do you remember the poor string of prisoners who are being dragged along
to the feet of the great king--how dejected they looked among the
warriors who led them? Who could--who _could_ have thought that within
three hours the same fate should be our own? And Mr. Headingly--”
She turned her face away and began to cry.

“Don’t take on, Sadie,” said her aunt; “remember what the minister said
just now, that we are all right there in the hollow of God’s hand.
Where do you think we are going, Mr. Stephens?”

The red edge of his Baedeker still projected from the lawyer’s pocket,
for it had not been worth their captor’s while to take it. He glanced
down at it.

“If they will only leave me this, I will look up a few references when
we halt. I have a general idea of the country, for I drew a small map
of it the other day. The river runs from south to north, so we must be
travelling almost due west. I suppose they feared pursuit if they kept
too near the Nile bank. There is a caravan route, I remember, which
runs parallel to the river, about seventy miles inland. If we continue
in this direction for a day we ought to come to it. There is a line of
wells through which it passes. It comes out at Assiout, if I remember
right, upon the Egyptian side. On the other side, it leads away into
the Dervish country--so, perhaps--”

His words were interrupted by a high, eager voice, which broke suddenly
into a torrent of jostling words, words without meaning, pouring
strenuously out in angry assertions and foolish repetitions. The pink
had deepened to scarlet upon Mr. Stuart’s cheeks, his eyes were vacant
but brilliant, and he gabbled, gabbled, gabbled as he rode.
Kindly mother Nature! she will not let her children be mishandled too
far. “This is too much,” she says; “this wounded leg, these crusted
lips, this anxious, weary mind. Come away for a time, until your body
becomes more habitable.” And so she coaxes the mind away into the
Nirvana of delirium, while the little cell-workers tinker and toil
within to get things better for its homecoming. When you see the veil
of cruelty which nature wears, try and peer through it, and you will
sometimes catch a glimpse of a very homely, kindly face behind.

The Arab guards looked askance at this sudden outbreak of the clergyman,
for it verged upon lunacy, and lunacy is to them a fearsome and
supernatural thing. One of them rode forward and spoke with the Emir.
When he returned he said something to his comrades, one of whom closed
in upon each side of the minister’s camel, so as to prevent him from
falling. The friendly negro sidled his beast up to the Colonel, and
whispered to him.

“We are going to halt presently, Belmont,” said Cochrane.

“Thank God! They may give us some water. We can’t go on like this.”

“I told Tippy Tilly that, if he could help us, we would turn him into a
Bimbashi when we got him back into Egypt. I think he’s willing enough
if he only had the power. By Jove, Belmont, do look back at the river.”

Their route, which had lain through sand-strewn khors with jagged, black
edges--places up which one would hardly think it possible that a camel
could climb--opened out now on to a hard, rolling plain, covered thickly
with rounded pebbles, dipping and rising to the violet hills upon the
horizon. So regular were the long, brown pebble-strewn curves, that
they looked like the dark rollers of some monstrous ground-swell. Here
and there a little straggling sage-green tuft of camel-grass sprouted up
between the stones. Brown plains and violet hills--nothing else in
front of them! Behind lay the black jagged rocks through which they had
passed with orange slopes of sand, and then far away a thin line of
green to mark the course of the river. How cool and beautiful that
green looked in the stark, abominable wilderness! On one side they
could see the high rock--the accursed rock which had tempted them to
their ruin. On the other the river curved, and the sun gleamed upon the
water. Oh, that liquid gleam, and the insurgent animal cravings, the
brutal primitive longings, which for the instant took the soul out of
all of them! They had lost families, countries, liberty, everything,
but it was only of water, water, water, that they could think. Mr.
Stuart in his delirium began roaring for oranges, and it was
insufferable for them to have to listen to him. Only the rough, sturdy
Irishman rose superior to that bodily craving. That gleam of river must
be somewhere near Halfa, and his wife might be upon the very water at
which he looked. He pulled his hat over his eyes, and rode in gloomy
silence, biting at his strong, iron-grey moustache.

Slowly the sun sank towards the west, and their shadows began to trail
along the path where their hearts would go. It was cooler, and a desert
breeze had sprung up, whispering over the rolling, stone-strewed plain.
The Emir at their head had called his lieutenant to his side, and the
pair had peered about, their eyes shaded by their hands, looking for
some landmark. Then, with a satisfied grunt, the chief’s camel had
seemed to break short off at its knees, and then at its hocks, going
down in three curious, broken-jointed jerks until its stomach was
stretched upon the ground. As each succeeding camel reached the spot it
lay down also, until they were all stretched in one long line.
The riders sprang off, and laid out the chopped tibbin upon cloths in
front of them, for no well-bred camel will eat from the ground.
In their gentle eyes, their quiet, leisurely way of eating, and their
condescending, mincing manner, there was something both feminine and
genteel, as though a party of prim old maids had foregathered in the
heart of the Libyan Desert.

There was no interference with the prisoners, either male or female, for
how could they escape in the centre of that huge plain? The Emir came
towards them once, and stood combing out his blue-black beard with his
fingers, and looking thoughtfully at them out of his dark, sinister
eyes. Miss Adams saw with a shudder that it was always upon Sadie that
his gaze was fixed. Then, seeing their distress, he gave an order, and
a negro brought a water-skin, from which he gave each of them about half
a tumblerful. It was hot and muddy, and tasted of leather, but oh how
delightful it was to their parched palates! The Emir said a few abrupt
words to the dragoman, and left.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” Mansoor began, with something of his old
consequential manner; but a glare from the Colonel’s eyes struck the
words from his lips, and he broke away into a long, whimpering excuse
for his conduct.

“How could I do anything otherwise,” he wailed, “with the very knife at
my throat?”

“You will have the very rope round your throat if we all see Egypt
again,” growled Cochrane savagely. “In the meantime--”

“That’s all right, Colonel,” said Belmont. “But for our own sakes we
ought to know what the chief has said.”

“For my part I’ll have nothing to do with the blackguard.”

“I think that that is going too far. We are bound to hear what he has
to say.” Cochrane shrugged his shoulders. Privations had made him
irritable, and he had to bite his lip to keep down a bitter answer.
He walked slowly away, with his straight-legged military stride.

“What did he say, then?” asked Belmont, looking at the dragoman with an
eye which was as stern as the Colonel’s.

“He seems to be in a somewhat better manner than before. He said that
if he had more water you should have it, but that he is himself short in
supply. He said that to-morrow we shall come to the wells of Selimah,
and everybody shall have plenty--and the camels too.”

“Did he say how long we stopped here?”

“Very little rest, he said, and then forward! Oh, Mr. Belmont--”

“Hold your tongue!” snapped the Irishman, and began once more to count
times and distances. If it all worked out as he expected, if his wife
had insisted upon the indolent reis giving an instant alarm at Halfa,
then the pursuers should be already upon their track. The Camel Corps
or the Egyptian Horse would travel by moonlight better and faster than
in the day-time. He knew that it was the custom at Halfa to keep at
least a squadron of them all ready to start at any instant. He had
dined at the mess, and the officers had told him how quickly they could
take the field. They had shown him the water-tanks and the food beside
each of the beasts, and he had admired the completeness of the
arrangements, with little thought as to what it might mean to him in the
future. It would be at least an hour before they would all get started
again from their present halting-place. That would be a clear hour
gained. Perhaps by next morning--

And then, suddenly, his thoughts were terribly interrupted.
The Colonel, raving like a madman, appeared upon the crest of the
nearest slope, with an Arab hanging on to each of his wrists. His face
was purple with rage and excitement, and he tugged and bent and writhed
in his furious efforts to get free. “You cursed murderers!” he
shrieked, and then, seeing the others in front of him, “Belmont,” he
cried, “they’ve killed Cecil Brown.”

What had happened was this. In his conflict with his own ill-humour,
Cochrane had strolled over this nearest crest, and had found a group of
camels in the hollow beyond, with a little knot of angry, loud-voiced
men beside them. Brown was the centre of the group, pale, heavy-eyed,
with his upturned, spiky moustache and listless manner. They had
searched his pockets before, but now they were determined to tear off
all his clothes in the hope of finding something which he had secreted.
A hideous negro with silver bangles in his ears, grinned and jabbered in
the young diplomatist’s impassive face. There seemed to the Colonel to
be something heroic and almost inhuman in that white calm, and those
abstracted eyes. His coat was already open, and the Negro’s great black
paw flew up to his neck and tore his shirt down to the waist. And at
the sound of that r-r-rip, and at the abhorrent touch of those coarse
fingers, this man about town, this finished product of the nineteenth
century, dropped his life-traditions and became a savage facing a
savage. His face flushed, his lips curled back, he chattered his teeth
like an ape, and his eyes--those indolent eyes which had always twinkled
so placidly--were gorged and frantic. He threw himself upon the negro,
and struck him again and again, feebly but viciously, in his broad,
black face. He hit like a girl, round arm, with an open palm. The man
winced away for an instant, appalled by this sudden blaze of passion.
Then with an impatient, snarling cry, he slid a knife from his long
loose sleeve and struck upwards under the whirling arm. Brown sat down
at the blow and began to cough--to cough as a man coughs who has choked
at dinner, furiously, ceaselessly, spasm after spasm. Then the angry
red cheeks turned to a mottled pallor, there were liquid sounds in his
throat, and, clapping his hand to his mouth, he rolled over on to his
side. The negro, with a brutal grunt of contempt, slid his knife up his
sleeve once more, while the Colonel, frantic with impotent anger, was
seized by the bystanders, and dragged, raving with fury, back to his
forlorn party. His hands were lashed with a camel-halter, and he lay at
last, in bitter silence, beside the delirious Nonconformist.

So Headingly was gone, and Cecil Brown was gone, and their haggard eyes
were turned from one pale face to another, to know which they should
lose next of that frieze of light-hearted riders who had stood out so
clearly against the blue morning sky, when viewed from the deck-chairs
of the _Korosko_. Two gone out of ten, and a third out of his mind.
The pleasure trip was drawing to its climax.

Fardet, the Frenchman, was sitting alone with his chin resting upon his
hands, and his elbows upon his knees, staring miserably out over the
desert, when Belmont saw him start suddenly and prick up his head like a
dog who hears a strange step. Then, with clenched fingers, he bent his
face forward and stared fixedly towards the black eastern hills through
which they had passed. Belmont followed his gaze, and, yes-yes--there
was something moving there! He saw the twinkle of metal, and the sudden
gleam and flutter of some white garment. A Dervish vedette upon the
flank turned his camel twice round as a danger signal, and discharged
his rifle in the air. The echo of the crack had hardly died away before
they were all in their saddles, Arabs and negroes. Another instant, and
the camels were on their feet and moving slowly towards the point of
alarm. Several armed men surrounded the prisoners, slipping cartridges
into their Remingtons as a hint to them to remain still.

“By Heaven, they are men on camels!” cried Cochrane, his troubles all
forgotten as he strained his eyes to catch sight of these new-comers.
“I do believe that it is our own people.” In the confusion he had tugged
his hands free from the halter which bound them.

“They’ve been smarter than I gave them credit for,” said Belmont, his
eyes shining from under his thick brows. “They are here a long two
hours before we could have reasonably expected them. Hurrah, Monsieur
Fardet, _ça va bien, n’est ce pas?_”

“Hurrah, hurrah! _merveilleusement bien! Vivent les Anglais! Vivent
les Anglais!_” yelled the excited Frenchman, as the head of a column of
camelry began to wind out from among the rocks.

“See here, Belmont,” cried the Colonel. “These fellows will want to
shoot us if they see it is all up. I know their ways, and we must be
ready for it. Will you be ready to jump on the fellow with the blind
eye? and I’ll take the big nigger, if I can get my arms round him.
Stephens, you must do what you can. You, Fardet, _comprenez vous?
Il est necessaire_ to plug these Johnnies before they can hurt us.
You, dragoman, tell those two Soudanese soldiers that they must be
ready--but, but” ... his words died into a murmur, and he swallowed
once or twice. “These are Arabs,” said he, and it sounded like another
voice.

Of all the bitter day, it was the very bitterest moment. Happy Mr.
Stuart lay upon the pebbles with his back against the ribs of his camel,
and chuckled consumedly at some joke which those busy little
cell-workers had come across in their repairs. His fat face was
wreathed and creased with merriment. But the others, how sick, how
heart-sick, were they all! The women cried. The men turned away in
that silence which is beyond tears. Monsieur Fardet fell upon his face,
and shook with dry sobbings.

The Arabs were firing their rifles as a welcome to their friends, and
the others as they trotted their camels across the open returned the
salutes and waved their rifles and lances in the air. They were a
smaller band than the first one--not more than thirty--but dressed in
the same red headgear and patched jibbehs. One of them carried a small
white banner with a scarlet text scrawled across it. But there was
something there which drew the eyes and the thoughts of the tourists
away from everything else. The same fear gripped at each of their
hearts, and the same impulse kept each of them silent. They stared at a
swaying white figure half seen amidst the ranks of the desert warriors.

“What’s that they have in the middle of them?” cried Stephens at last.
“Look, Miss Adams! Surely it is a woman!”

There was something there upon a camel, but it was difficult to catch a
glimpse of it. And then suddenly, as the two bodies met, the riders
opened out, and they saw it plainly.

“It’s a white woman!”

“The steamer has been taken!”

Belmont gave a cry that sounded high above everything.

“Norah, darling,” he shouted, “keep your heart up! I’m here, and it is
all well!”