III


Ida slept for two hours longer and rose in a philosophical mood. As
she more than once had remarked to Ora, “nothing in life is just what
you figured it out beforehand”; and this, one of life’s most unwelcome
lessons, it had not taken her twenty-six years to learn. She had, in
fact, accepted and docketed it while women twice her age were nursing
their illusions.

She had expected to be met at the station not only by her husband but
by Ruby and Pearl, to say nothing of reporters. “She had slunk in like
a nobody,” and her husband declined to feed the fires of her vanity,
blazing so merrily these last ten months. Never mind. She had the
genius of quick readjustment and a sharp eye for the next move in the
great law of compensation.

“And believe me,” she thought, as she put the finishing touches to her
smart morning street costume, and taught the admiring Swede how to pin
on a veil, “the gods have provided the goods pretty liberally, and I
don’t belong to the immortal order of female jackasses. Nine-tenths of
women’s troubles, mental and physical, sprout in that hothouse corner
of their skulls they call imagination. None of it in mine. Let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die. Wait till I’m launched in
Butte. And just wait till I give a dinner party to the second son of an
English duke. Tra la la!”

Before the morning was over even philosophy had folded her wings. If
life had been niggardly yesterday she gave with both hands today. When
Ida arrived at the bank she was received with exceeding deference by
the vice-president and informed that he had recently invested two
hundred thousand dollars in her name, acting on instructions from Mr.
Compton; and that as a large part of it was in mortgages the interest
in some cases ran as high as eight per cent. The money had been placed
in his hands for investment shortly after the great land deal, details
of which had reached the public ear in due course and greatly added to
the prestige of Gregory Compton. In fact it had invested his remote
and ambiguous personality with an almost sinister significance. As
Ida listened to the story of this transaction (she barely had opened
a newspaper in New York and knew nothing of it), she found herself
wondering if it could be true that once she had possessed this man of
whom even bankers spoke with bated breath. It was patent that they
stood in awe not only of the rapid and masterly strokes which had
increased his little patrimony by something over two millions in less
than a year, but of his colossal luck, his sensational reputation as a
“winner”, and his open defiance of the greatest of all great trusts.

It seemed to Ida, as she sat in the vice-president’s office listening
to his classification of her husband with Marcus Daly, W. A. Clark,
and F. Augustus Heinze, the three commanding figures heretofore in the
financial history of Montana, and to predictions that Compton would go
farther than any one of his predecessors, that she might have known
Gregory in his extreme youth or in some previous existence; but that
this man who now not only ranked first in the eyes of all Montana,
but had focussed the attention of a continent, no longer touched
her life save as a fairy-godfather. It was the first time that she
had appreciated his fame. She had been absorbed in Europe and its
diversions--and diverters; the new wealth had been accepted as a matter
of course; her imagination had not been powerful enough to visualise at
a distance what her mind grasped the moment the facts were presented to
her in the measured yet glowing terms of a bank’s president.

“He always did feel himself a cut above me,” she thought grimly as she
left the building and walked down Main Street. “And now, I suppose, he
thinks Perch of the Devil is Mount Olympus, and that he is some god.
It would be fun to put a nick or two in his halo--but never mind: I’ve
got a cool two hundred thousand--_and_ a palatial residence, _and_ a
limousine--sounds like a fairy tale. There’s nothing mean about him,
anyhow.”

When she reached her beautiful home she found four reporters awaiting
her. They apologised for not meeting her at the train, but as hour
after hour had passed with discouraging reports, they finally had
gone home to recuperate for the next day’s labours. Ida dismissed the
last of her regrets, and told them all that she wished Butte to know
at once, showed the women the contents of her trunks, which the maids
were unpacking, promised to let them know when the newer Paris wardrobe
arrived, and finally gave them lunch. Reporters are the quickest people
in the world to detect affectations, assumptions, and false values, and
the most merciless in their exposure; but, although these four were on
the alert, they could find neither traces of original commonness nor
imitation of the British aristocracy. Ida apparently had consigned the
slang of her former class to the limbo of careless grammar, and she was
so simple and natural that they failed to discover how clever she was;
they agreed, as they walked down Broadway, that she was merely a marvel
of adaptability, like so many others that had done credit to the great
state of Montana, to say nothing of the fluid West in general.

But, although Ida could be anything she chose when occasion demanded,
she always sought relief from the strain as quickly as possible.
Immediately after the departure of the reporters she telephoned for her
limousine and drove to the large “Block” in the heart of the business
district where Miss Ruby Miller kept the looks of the Butte ladies up
to par. As she left the elevator she saw that the familiar door was
open as usual and the old screen before it. She tapped discreetly, and
Miss Ruby came out into the hall, removing the cold cream from her
hands with her apron.

“Ide!” she cried rapturously, throwing both arms about her friend’s
velvet shoulders. “Glory be, but I’m glad to see you and you do look
fine----”

“How mean of you not to meet me----”

“We had it all fixed and supper here, but gave it up at ten o’clock.
For all we knew you might not get in till morning, and you know how we
work----”

“Well, I’ll forgive you if you both come to dinner with me tonight. I
want to have one good old time before I sit up and play the grande dame
act for weeks on end----”

“I guess you’re one now without any play-acting. You look the real
thing all right. And I guess we won’t see so awful much of you now----”

“Do you mean because I’m harnessed up to a bunch of money----” began
Ida in high indignation.

“Oh, I know you’ll always feel the same, but grand dames and our sort
don’t gee at the same table. The West is democratic but it ain’t too
democratic. Don’t think I’m jealous. You’re just where I’d like to
be myself, and I’m proud that one of us has got to the top so quick.
My! But Mr. Compton’s a wonder. To think that I ever dared call him
Greg--even behind his back. Well, he’ll be just as proud of you as you
are of him. Pearl’ll want to see your hats.”

“She can copy them all. Be sure to come early.”

She felt warmed by the little interview, but as she went down in the
elevator she admitted to herself that her future intercourse with her
old friends must be sporadic, no matter what her loyalty; and she
wondered if her new friends would take their place; or even be to her
the half of what Ora had become in the long intimacy of travel. She
shrugged her handsome shoulders. If you elected to mount in life, you
must pay the toll. Were she abruptly returned to the old cottage in
East Granite Street certainly Ruby and Pearl would not compensate her.
No, not for a moment. You may slip back in life if you are not strong
enough to hold on, but you do not deliberately turn back even for the
friends of your youth. Neither does Progress halt and sit down to wait
for its failures to catch up. Ida leaned back in her limousine and met
the interested eyes of many pedestrians of both sexes as her chauffeur
drove her about for an hour to get the air, and incidentally to be
looked at.

Today she was in a mood to enjoy Butte, and she deliberately summoned
the long anticipated sensations. She revelled in the gaunt grey
ugliness of Anaconda Hill which flung its arrogant head high above the
eastern end of the great hill itself; in the sensation of driving over
miles of subterranean numbered streets, some of them three thousand
feet below, to which that famous mass of rock and dirt and angular
buildings was the portal. She leaned far out of her car to admire the
glittering mountains that looked like blue ice topped with white, and
decided that they were far more original and beautiful than the Alps of
Austria and Switzerland; certainly they tugged at her heartstrings and
at the same time filled her with an unprecedented desire to sing. She
noticed for the first time that the violet foothills against the nearer
mountain east of the city seemed to close the end of the streets as the
Alps did in Innspruck, and gave the ragged overgrown camp clinging to
its high perch in the Rockies a redeeming touch of perfect beauty.

She drove out to Columbia Gardens, bought flowers from the conservatory
for her rooms, and wandered about recalling the many gay times she had
had in the dancing pavilion. But her eye was suddenly arrested by the
steep mountain behind, then dropped slowly to the base. It was there
that she had promised to marry Gregory Compton. She remembered his
young passion and her own. She had never felt anything like it again;
nor had he ever been quite the same. Was it one of those “supreme
moments” novelists so blithely alluded to? The logical inference of
that old bit of bathos was that such moments had no duplicates. She
felt faint and dizzy for a moment; then walked back to her car, smiling
grimly as she realised that she had experienced a fleeting echo of that
vast unattainable desire women live and die cherishing or bewailing.
“Poor things! Poor things!” she thought, with the first pang of pity
her sex had ever inspired. “No wonder they go in for suffrage, art,
work, any old thing. Home,” she added to the chauffeur.

She peremptorily dismissed all thought of the past during the drive
back to town and reverted to her pleasure in once more feeling a part
of her surroundings, hideous though they might, for the most part, be;
instead of walking with alert critical eye through what always must
seem to her the animated pages of ancient history. But her complacency
received a sudden shock. The car was rolling along Park Street when her
eye rested upon a man’s face vaguely familiar. She had bowed graciously
and the face was behind her before she realised that the man was
Professor Whalen, and that, for a second, she had looked into a pair of
pale blue eyes that sent her a swift message of hate.

Ida shuddered. The warm light air of her beloved Rockies turned cold
and heavy. “I feel as if I’d stepped on a snake and just missed getting
bitten,” she thought, putting her sensations into a concrete form,
after her habit. “I had forgotten the little viper was alive, and I
wish to goodness he wasn’t.” She had flouted superstition always, but
she could not shake off the sense of menace and evil that had vibrated
from the man until she was within her own doors once more. Then she
became as oblivious of Whalen’s existence as during that late exotic
period when everything connected with her old life had seemed too crude
to be real.

The parlour maid handed her a note that had arrived an hour before from
Mr. Luning, Mark’s partner. Mrs. Blake, he wrote, had bought a present
for Mrs. Compton in Paris and sent it to the care of her husband’s
firm. Mr. Luning had gone the day before to Great Falls to clear it in
the Custom House, and now had the pleasure of forwarding the boxes, etc.

“Good gracious!” exclaimed Ida, “what can it be?”

“There’s four big boxes in the back hall, ma’am.”

Ida lost no time. If Ora had given her a present it must be worth
looking at, and she went as rapidly as dignity would permit to the
nether regions and ordered the boxes opened. The present proved to
be a magnificent silver service, from many dozens of “flat ware” to
massive platters, vegetable dishes, flower, fruit and bon-bon pieces,
and candelabra. The delighted servants made a shining display on
the dining-room table, and after Ida had gloated over it for a time
and informed her audience that it was copied from a royal service
in the Louvre, she went suddenly up to her bedroom. This time she
did shed a few tears, and as she looked at her handkerchief in some
wonder she decided that there was at least one person that she loved,
“hard-headed” as she was, and that Ora Blake had found the one soft
spot in her flinty heart and wormed herself into it. She went to
her desk immediately and wrote Ora a letter that was almost tender,
admitting that she missed her “like fury”, and begging her to return
soon.

“Greg telephoned this morning,” she concluded, oblivious that she was
betraying the fact that she had not seen her husband, “and told me to
tell you to keep Mark down below for several months. But his lungs must
be well by this time or he’d be dead. And the rest of him will mend all
the sooner in this magnificent air. Heavens, but it’s good to breathe
it again! It makes one feel as if the atmosphere of Europe hadn’t been
aired for a century. I’ve got a wonder of a house and a jim dandy of a
limousine, but ever since I came I’ve felt kind of homesick, and I’ve
just realised it’s for you, old girl. So, come home. Once more ten
million thanks.”

And when Ruby and Pearl dined with her that night she realised that all
her old zest in their society was gone. Ida Hook, at least, had “passed
on.”