XXV


On the following morning Ida, having seen Ora on the train bound for
Chicago, went at once to a public garage, rented the touring car she
had used the night before, and was driven out to the mines. She walked
up to the cabin on the crest of Perch of the Devil and, finding it
empty, summoned a miner who was lounging near and bade him call Mr.
Compton. The man asked to be allowed to use the telephone in the
office, obtained connection with the second level of the mine, and
announced in a few moments that the boss was on his way up.

Ida, who had dropped wearily into a chair, merely nodded as Gregory
entered. He was as pale as a dark man can be, and his voice when he
spoke sounded as if he had been running.

“What is it?” he demanded. “Has anything happened----”

“To Ora? Nothing, except that she is on her way East and to Europe.
Tired, no doubt, but quite well.”

Gregory drew a short sigh of relief, and sat down before his table,
shading his eyes with his hand. “Well?” he asked. “What is it?”

“I haven’t come out here to make a scene, or even to reproach you. I
believe that I should have the self-restraint to ignore the subject
altogether if it were not for that man, Whalen. Some one must put an
extinguisher on him at once and you are the one to do it. That is why
I am obliged to tell you that I found out yesterday about you and Ora.
I had begun to believe there must be some woman in the case but I had
not the least suspicion of Ora. I not only believed her to be the soul
of honour, but I thought she was really in love with the Marchese
Valdobia, a Roman who has everything to offer that a woman of her type
demands, and to marry whom she had demanded a divorce from Mark. She
has been tacitly engaged to him ever since we left Europe.”

Ida saw the muscles in Gregory’s long body stiffen as if he were about
to spring, and his eyes glitter through the lattice of his fingers.
But he made no comment, and after giving him time to assimilate her
information, she added more gently:

“Console yourself with the reflection that she would have thrown him
over for you. But she knows now what a mistake she would have made. Ora
is one of those atavistic Americans that are far more at home in Europe
than in the new world. She has gone where she belongs and Valdobia is
her man.”

She paused again. He was still silent, and she continued less fluently:
“Now I come to the unpleasant part for myself. To begin at the
beginning: I made an enemy of little Whalen before I went abroad. He
had the sublime impudence to kiss me one day, and I simply took him by
the back of his neck and the seat of his pants and threw him out of the
window. He has had it in for me ever since.”

In spite of the various emotions raging within him, Gregory laughed
aloud at the picture. The atmosphere felt clearer. Ida went on with
more confidence:

“Of course you know that Lord John Mowbray followed me here. He wanted
me to get a divorce and marry him, as Valdobia had planned with Ora.
I liked him well enough, but even if I had been free it never would
have occurred to me to marry him, and no one knew better than he that
I didn’t care a copper cent for him. His hope after he came here--a
hope in which he was encouraged by Ora--was that, as you were so loudly
indifferent, pride might drive me to leave you and make a brilliant
marriage. Well, I was tempted for a moment. It was on the night of the
day I had been down in the mine with you. I believed that I had given
myself away absolutely, offered myself and been refused as casually as
if I had been some woman of the streets; told you almost in so many
words that I loved you and been invited with excruciating politeness to
go to the devil.

“Well, that night I nearly went off my head. I had a whole mind, for
a few moments, to ring up Mowbray and tell him that I would get my
freedom and leave the country for ever. But that passed. I couldn’t
have done it, and I knew it, in spite of the blood pumping in my head.
I went out for a walk, for I had smashed a few things already. Then the
mad impulse came to me to call on Mowbray. I knew that I’d treat him
no better than I had treated Whalen if he so much as tried to kiss me.
But I wasn’t afraid. He was too keen on marrying me to take any risks.
What I wanted was to do something real devilish--to be more elegant,
something quite the antithesis of all that is _comme il faut_. So I
went. Mowbray wasn’t there. He had gone to the dance at the Country
Club. I sat down to wait for him and fell asleep. When I awoke it was
after one o’clock and I was still alone. I can tell you I got out
pretty quick. I had slept the blood out of my head and I felt like a
fool. I bribed the Jap not to tell Mowbray or anyone else.

“Well, the point of all this is--and the only reason I have told
you--Whalen saw me go in and waited for me to come out. He believed
that he had found his chance for revenge at last. No doubt he would
have told you on the way to Helena, but he hasn’t the spunk of a road
agent at the wrong end of a gun. So he took his tale to Ora when he got
back.--But before I go any further I want you to say that you believe
I had no wrong motive in going to Mowbray’s rooms. Of course a hundred
people could testify that he did not leave the Country Club until three
o’clock, but that is not the point with you.”

“I believe you,” said Gregory. He was intensely interested.

Ida drew a long sigh and the colour came back to her face. Her eyes,
heavy with fatigue, sparkled. “Well! Whalen was all for drinking his
cup of revenge down to the dregs. It wasn’t enough to spring a mine
under me, he must see what I looked like when it blew up the first
time. After he told Ora he posted into Butte and managed to get into
my house unannounced--that maid has been fired. I was in the library
on the other side of the room. The doorway was good enough for him. He
told me. Some time I’ll tell you all I felt. After he had lit out with
the Venus of Milo flying after him, I went stark mad. I made up what
mind I had left to kill Ora and kill her quick.”

“What?” Gregory sat up and stared at her, his eyes wide open. And,
astounded as he was, the immortal vanity of man thrilled responsively
to the reckless and destructive passions he had inspired in these two
remarkable women.

“I got a touring car and arrived at the foot of her hill--a little
after eleven it was, I guess. There was a light in her living-room, and
I made up my mind to wait until I was sure she was alone and in her
bedroom. Then I intended to get in somehow or other and kill her with
that stiletto she gave me in Genoa. It was a notion of hers that I had
been one of the wicked dames of the Renaissance, and I just naturally
took the hint. While I was waiting the light went out and almost
immediately I saw her hurry down the path that led to her claim and go
into her shaft house. I knew on the instant that she was going to you,
and that she took that route to avoid being seen. My mind could grasp
that much in spite of the fixed idea in it--that she was on her way to
tell you Whalen’s story. This was true as I found out afterwards. She
went that night, partly because she couldn’t keep it any longer, partly
because she wanted to tell you when you were alone in your cabin at
night and she could also bind you hand and foot with that Lorelei hair
of hers. It takes the hyper-civilised super-refined Oras to stick at
nothing when their primitive instincts loosen up.

“Well--I went into the shaft house, and listened until I no longer
could hear her on the ladder. Then I followed. Glory! Shall I ever
forget going down that ladder? I felt as if every muscle in my body
were being torn up by the roots; and I had to carry the stiletto
between my teeth. And pitch dark. All my clothes in the way every step.
It was enough to take the starch out of tragedy, and I guess it would
have flattened me out if it hadn’t been just the one thing that could
make me madder still.

“I’ll give you the details of that scene some other time. I’m too
tired now. It is enough to say that she had a pistol and made such an
infernal racket with it--shooting at the roof--that something busted in
my head and I came to. Then we had it out. She agreed to leave because
she knew me too well to believe I had gone to Mowbray’s rooms for any
horrid purpose, and he hadn’t been there anyway. I told her that if she
told you it would have to be before me, and she knew that she couldn’t
brazen it through. So I packed her and got her off this morning. That
means that I had no sleep last night.”

She stood up and Gregory rose also. “Now, there are two things more,”
she said with no lack of decision in her voice, whatever her fatigue of
body. “You must settle Whalen, and you must move to Butte and live in
my house, even if you are only there once or twice a week. Whalen, the
moment he discovers that Ora has gone, will run about Butte defaming
me, or carry the story to the papers. It wouldn’t do me much good to
prove that Mowbray wasn’t there. People like to believe the worst,
and in time would forget that Mowbray had been at the Club on that
particular night. My set might be all right. But the rest--and my
servants--and Ruby and Pearl! They always use the word ‘bad,’ and, as
Ora says, an intrigue is only decent in a foreign language. It gives me
the horrors to think of it. But if we are seen together twice a week,
and you are known to be living in the house, however often you must be
absent, nobody will listen to a story that is not headed toward the
divorce court.”

“I’ll buy Whalen’s claim and tell him to get out of Montana. He’ll go!
As for the rest of your programme--please be sure, Ida, that I stand
ready to protect you now and always. You are not only my wife but an
extraordinary woman, and I am very proud of you.”

“Oh, the extraordinary woman hasn’t been born yet, in spite of the big
fight the sex is putting up,” said Ida lightly, as they left the cabin
and walked down the hill. “When women really are extraordinary they
will be just as happy without men as they now want to be with them.
They try with all their might to be hard, and they can ring outside
like metal, but inside they are just one perpetual shriek for the right
man to come along--that is all but a few hundred thousand tribadists.
But they’ve made a beginning, and one day they’ll really be able to
take men as incidentally as men take women. Then we’ll all be happy.
Don’t you fool yourself that that’s what I’m aiming at, though. I’m the
sort that hangs on to her man like grim death.”

“You’re all right!” said Gregory, who, man-like, was automatically
readjusting himself to the inevitable.

He handed her into the tonneau of the car, and tucked the robe about
her. She gave his hand a hearty friendly shake, for she was much too
wise and too tired for sentiment. “Don’t you worry about Ora,” she
said. “Custer is with her and she has the drawing-room, and is probably
sound asleep at this moment. It must be very restful to get a tragic
love affair off your chest.”

And then the car rolled off and she fell asleep at once.