XXXII


They went out at half-past five and joined the dense sauntering throng
under the arcade of the Via Venti Settembre. All Genoa turns out at
this hour with apparently no object but to amble and stare. The two
girls, particularly Ora, who appeared to be the only blonde in the
city, were almost mobbed. Every other man spoke to them, or rolled
his eyes and twirled his moustache. But they preserved a lofty and
blank demeanour, and were practically unmolested. The Genoese works
almost as hard as the American during a few hours of the day and haunts
the afternoon throngs only to amuse himself indolently. If one woman
ignores him he passes on philosophically to the next.

“Lord, but I’d like to get a move on!” exclaimed Ida. “Why don’t they
_walk_? Is this what they call exercise? And I wouldn’t mind their
ogling and speaking if they only wouldn’t pinch. I’ll give this side a
rest, anyhow.” And she dexterously changed places and drew Ora’s other
arm through her own.

“I love them, pinches and all,” said Ora, warmly. “They are like
children in one way, and yet they really know how to rest and enjoy
themselves, which is more than our men ever do. Even the working-class
enjoys life over here. I wonder why they emigrate?”

They had passed round the corner of the arcade and entered the Piazza
Defarrari, working their way toward the Via Roma. Ora stopped before
one of the cantinas behind the statue of Garibaldi. “Look at those men
drinking their cheap wine and gossipping. They look as if they hadn’t a
care in the world.”

“Give me the hustling American,” said Ida contemptuously. “I don’t call
this life. They’re just drifting along waiting for the Angel Gabriel
to blow his trump. What makes them so lazy and contented? They know
they can go just so far over here and no farther. Ancient history made
classes and masses, and while they have fun, some of them, thinking
they’re socialists, they know that most of them will stay put. But the
only real fun in life is getting ahead of the next fellow and knowing
that your chance is as good as any.”

“What a truly American sentiment!”

“I’m American, all right, and that’s the reason I want to get back to
Butte, where things hum every minute, and there’s no real poverty.
Fancy calling these left-overs ‘middle-class’ like our miners. Every
one of those looks forward to being President of Amalgamated one of
these days, or striking it rich in the mountains.”

“There are different varieties of happiness, fortunately for several
billions that are seeking it.”

“Do you know,” said Ida, abruptly, as they turned into the Galleria
Mazzini from the Via Roma, “it’s queer, but I feel more at home in
Italy than I have anywhere else over here, although I had a really
better time in England and Germany and Austria. I don’t hit it off much
with Italians, but--well--I have a more settled-down feeling.”

“That’s odd!”

“Why?”

“Oh, I’ve been romancing about you a bit, fancying you a reincarnation
of one of those fascinating abominable women of the Renaissance, who
had innumerable lovers and poisoned their husbands, or rivals. You
would look quite wonderful in those long velvet or brocaded gowns, with
sleeves that come down over the hands, and pearls twined in your hair.”

“That’s not a bad idea. Maybe I was, although I don’t see myself
with lovers or thinking anybody worth swinging for. Several American
reincarnations must have changed my habits; but I don’t mind looking
the part. Good idea--when we get back to Paris I’ll have several of
those Renaissance costumes made. They won’t go out of style, either.
Greg can fork over the pearls later.”

“You’ll be a picture. I wish I had thought of it before. Don’t you
think you are capable of jealousy?”

“Nixie. To be jealous you’ve got to have a fearful crush; and thank the
lord I don’t love anybody but myself and never shall.”

“That is often the secret of love for some man--of most men’s love for
a woman, I imagine! Perhaps it creates the most powerful delusion of
all.”

“Well, none of it in mine. Me for the great society act. I’m going to
be the grandest dame in Montana, and when I’ve wrung that dry I’ll move
on to New York. Greg says he won’t, means to live and die in Montana,
but I guess he’ll manage to stand it if I desert him occasionally.
If he’s got a hill full of copper he won’t know whether I’m in Butte
or the Waldorf-Astoria. You look better, Ora; you ought to stay out
of doors more and watch these funny old crowds. You’ve got a nice
colour, and smile as if you meant it--Oh! that’s it, is it? Well, thank
goodness, I’ve got a front seat----”

“What on earth are you talking about?”

“Pretending you haven’t seen him? I like that!”

Ida felt the arm within her own stiffen. “Valdobia! Don’t leave me for
a moment.”

“I won’t, although, believe me, the rôle of gooseberry is no cinch.”

“I’ve played it for you often enough.”

“You have, and I’m a dead game sport. Lord! he looks more bad-tempered
than ever. Probably every meal he’s eaten since you left has disagreed
with him, including macaroni.”

“He’s not bad-tempered. Hot-tempered, no doubt, but I’m sure he’s kind
and quite amiable. He’s rather grim, and of course he’s lived pretty
hard and is disillusioned. That is all.”

“That’s right, stand up for him. Bad sign--or a good one! He’s seen us!”

Valdobia’s eyes flashed recognition, although he lifted his hat with
unsmiling lips, and made no effort to push his way through the crowd.
Ora favoured him with a glance of chill indifference as she returned
his salutation, but she noticed that he made the young Genoese
patricians look provincial. He not only was tall and gracefully built,
his carriage military, but he had the air of repose and distinction,
as well as the keen, tolerant, detached glance, of the man who has
spent his life in the great world, and, on the whole, subordinated
his weaknesses to his brain. It was evident that he was dressed from
Conduit Street, and at first glance, in spite of his dark colouring
and fine Roman features, his nationality was not obtrusive; he looked
the cosmopolitan, the man-of-the-world, who might have made his
headquarters in any one of her great capitals. As a matter of fact,
while in the diplomatic service he had lived in several, including a
short sojourn in Washington; but after coming into a large inheritance
through the death of his father and of an energetic uncle who had
boldly gone into business and prospered, he had travelled for a year in
Africa and India and then settled in Rome.

If he was too indifferent or too wise to hurry he managed to make his
way consistently toward them, although a crowd had formed about a
bulletin board to read the latest news from the seat of war. He stood
opposite them in three or four minutes and shook hands politely with
both.

“At last!” he said. “I called at the Bristol, and have been looking
for you ever since.” He had a warm deep voice but his tones and manner
expressed less than his words.

“You don’t have to look far in Genoa,” said Ida, giving him a cordial
smile and handshake to cover Ora’s chilling welcome. “If the whole town
turns out for what it calls exercise, each quarter seems to keep to
itself. We see the same faces every day.”

Valdobia fell into step beside Ida, who at once began to chatter
questions about their common acquaintance in Rome. She grinned mentally
as she rattled off titles, recalling the wiry little figure of her
mother at the wash-tub, and her father with his “muck”-spattered
overalls and blue dinner pail; but Valdobia, too accustomed to titles
to note whether Americans were lavish in their use or not, replied
naturally and refrained from glancing at the woman who had given his
self-centred ego the profoundest shock it had ever received. He was
now thirty-eight. In his early manhood he had loved with the facility
and brevity of his race. Then for six years, after his return to Rome,
he had been the lover of a brilliant and subtle woman ten years older
than himself, who, for a short time, inspired in him the belief that
at last he had entered the equatorial region of the _grande passion_.
This passed off, and she became a habit, which lasted until, with
the decline of her beauty, she lost much of her finesse, as well as
her control over both temper and complexion. It had taken him a year
or more to regain his liberty, and when he did, after scenes that
he fain would dismiss from his memory, he determined to keep it. His
long experience with a woman of many characteristics and one or two
noble qualities, before she gossipped and inflamed them to death, had
thoroughly disillusioned him, and since his release his gallantries
had been lighter than in his youth. When he first met Ora Blake he was
attracted merely by her cold fairness, redeemed from classic severity
by her brilliant seeing eyes, which so often sparkled with humour, and
amused at her naïve and girlish attitude of happiness in temporary
freedom; so successfully practised by herself and Ida. He had supposed
her to be little more than twenty, and had wondered if her husband
were even busier than the average American, to let her run away so
soon. When she told him she was twenty-seven, and had been married
seven years, he found himself speculating on the temperament of a woman
whom time and life had left untouched. Shortly after, he received a
biographical sketch of her from Mrs. O’Neil, also of Butte, who was
wintering in Rome and entertaining such of the aristocracy as she met
at her Embassy. It was some time since his thoughts had dwelt upon
any woman when alone, and when he found himself sitting by his window
in the evening dreaming over his cigar instead of amusing himself in
the varied life of Rome after his habit, he was at first amused, then
angry, finally apprehensive. He had no desire for another period of
torment, followed by the successive stages that finished in impatience
and satiety.

He tried flirting with her, making her talk about herself, focussing
her mind on the years she seemed determined to ignore, in the hope
of discovering that she was commonplace. But Ora, who found him more
interesting than any man she had met in Europe, also a conquest to be
proud of, continued to make herself interesting--and elusive--with a
skill and subtlety that so closely resembled the frank ingenuousness of
the West, that the man accustomed to the patented finesse of European
women experienced the agreeable sensation of renewing his youth. He
felt himself falling in love like a schoolboy, and meditated flight. He
remained in Rome, however, and made a deliberate attempt to fascinate
her. Then one day when Ida was pouring tea at the Embassy, chaperoned
by Lady Gower, he found Ora alone, indisposed after a sleepless night,
and lost his head. Ora, who was in no mood to let him down gently and
reserve him for conversational pleasures, dismissed him abruptly,
and had not seen him since. She had regretted her impatience, for he
was always worth talking to, her feminine liking for his type was
very strong, and she had amused herself fancying that if she had not
permitted another man to rule her imagination she might have found her
fate in this one. But as he had presumed to follow her when she had
banished him summarily, she greeted him with cool civility and resumed
her study of the kaleidoscopic crowd.

Suddenly she moved her head in a fashion that suggested the lifting of
one of the little ears that lay so close to her head and were not the
least of her points. The ear was on the side next to her companion in
arms. Could it be that Ida was flirting with Valdobia? Mrs. Compton’s
manner and speech were as correct as her smartly tailored suit and hat
of black velvet and the calm pride of her bearing, but she was talking
with sweet earnestness to the Roman about himself and expressing her
plaintive gratitude that he had cared to follow them to Genoa, where
she at least was very lonely. It had not been possible for Ora to see
the flash of understanding these two had exchanged after Valdobia’s
first puzzled glance, but she did see many heads turn to look at the
handsome and well-matched couple. Even the Italian women did not
smile ironically as they so often did at the too obvious American
tourist. Ida not only had delivered herself of every exterior trace
of commonness, but would no more have appeared on the street looking
the mere tourist than she could be betrayed into adopting the extreme
of any new style by the persuasive Parisian. She saw Ora’s head come
round her shoulder, and her voice deepened to the soft husky tones she
reserved for decisive moments with her agitated admirers, then dropped
so low that only the man, with his head bent, could hear the words. At
this stage of the flirtation’s progress Ora noted that the approving
glances of the sympathetic Italians were accompanied by significant
smiles.

They had reached the end of the long Galleria for the second time and
turned. The crowd was thin. The restaurants were filling. Shutters
were rattling down over the windows of the tempting shops. Said Ora
abruptly,

“I think I’d like to dine in one of these cafés--the Milano. The
Bristol dining-room is a little Ritz, and it’s a bore to dress.”

Valdobia leaned forward with a pleasant smile. “I should like nothing
better, but you must dine with me.”

“Why not? What do you say, Ida?”

“I’d love it. The food is good and the crowd more interesting.”

They entered the bright café and seated themselves at one of the side
tables, the two girls on the bench against the wall, Valdobia in the
chair opposite. A number of the tables were already occupied, several
by stout comfortable couples, but the majority by men with their hats
on, playing dominoes or reading the evening papers. Opposite the door
was a long table set forth with the delicacies of the season: raw meat,
winter vegetables, oranges, and kicking lobsters.

Valdobia, assiduously waited upon by the proprietor himself (whose
wife, surrounded by several of her children, smiled benignantly from
the cashier’s desk), ordered a special dinner; a light soup (the table
d’hôte soup was a meal in itself), spaghetti, inimitably cooked veal
in brown butter, salad, freshly caught fish, ices, and a bottle of the
host’s most precious Chianti.

“I never could have pictured you in a Bohemian restaurant,” said Ora,
smiling brilliantly into the face of her host. “Have you ever been in a
place like this before?”

“About as often as I have weeks to my credit.” He looked steadily
into her snapping eyes. “You have studied Italians to little purpose
if you’ve not discovered their partiality for their native cooking.
These plain little cafés are the last strongholds in our large cities.
Even the restaurants where the business men go for luncheon are queer
imitations of London or Paris.”

“We like to come here because the men pay no attention to us. It is men
of your class that know how to make us thoroughly uncomfortable.”

“Quite so. Every class has its own code. In ours it may be said
that the women set the pace. They demand open admiration and we are
gallant enough to give it. This class bothers itself little about the
unattainable, and merely throws you the passing tribute they would
throw to the Queen, or to a beautiful work of art.”

“Which they appreciate. Would that our working-classes did. On this
side the masses are as likely as not to spend their holidays in a
picture gallery or a museum. Ours can think of nothing better than a
saloon.”

“That may be the fault of your great country. The crude mind is
easily trained. Give your working-people more galleries and museums
and fewer saloons--or cantinas with their light wines, and beer
gardens, instead of rum and whiskey. But it is unfair to expect a new
and heterogeneous--almost chaotic--country to compete with twenty
centuries.” Two pairs of American eyes flashed, and he continued
suavely. “I fear that the old standards of my own people are in danger
of being demoralised by socialism and the new craving for raw spirits.
That is becoming a serious question with us.” He turned to Ida. “It is
far more odd to see you without your usual train of admirers--both of
you. How do you stand it?”

“Oh, we’re merely recuperating,” said Ida lightly, and smiling into his
admiring eyes. “We will return to the fray refreshed and more dangerous
than ever.”

“How much longer shall you stay here?”

“A week or two. Then we go on to Paris. After that Egypt, Spain, or
some other old place.”

“But not without seeing Monte Carlo? You must let me show it to you.”

“I suppose that is an old stamping ground of yours?”

“I go once a year, although, like a good many other pleasures, it has
lost its irresistible fascination. But I shall enjoy seeing you catch
the gambling fever.”

“I’m not very susceptible to microbes, but I don’t doubt Mrs. Blake
will gamble the clothes off her back. That would be the good old
Montana style.” And she told him something of life in Butte before it
indulged in one of its spasms of exterior reform, and of the present
life on The Flat.

“I must see your Butte,” he said enthusiastically. “An English friend
of mine has a ranch in Wyoming, and I may go out there next year.”

Ora stood this until the fish had been removed; then she emerged
conclusively from the cold and nervous apathy that had possessed her
for several days, and began to sparkle. Ida was no match for her
when she chose to exert herself, for that native product only really
shone when able to employ her own rich vocabulary. She subsided
with a smile and devoted herself to the excellent dinner, while Ora
entertained their fastidious host with bright little stories of the
adventures they never failed to experience, being two young women who
travelled with their eyes and ears wide open. Valdobia, now satisfied
that he had recaptured the interest of his lady and been in a measure
forgiven, gave her all his attention; although not a man disposed to
conversational exertion, he took pains to interest her in return. They
discussed the news of the day and the latest books; and his deference
to her opinions was very flattering, although he did not permit a
flash of his eyes to betray his passionate delight at being once more
with this woman whom he thought lovelier and more desirable than ever.
Ora wore a blue velvet suit, not too dark, and a little hat of the
same shade with a long feather that nestled in her warm ashen hair.
Her cheeks were as pink as her lips, and she held her chin up as if
drinking in the elixir of her native air. She looked very young and
wholly without guile.

She continued to enchant him until they were in the Bristol, and the
lift stopped at the first floor. Then she abruptly bade him good-night,
and ascended to her room, while the others went into the smoking-room
and ordered coffee at one of the smaller tables.

“Well?” said Ida, smiling. “I’m not the sort that talks in circles
except when I’m on parade. I’m glad you’ve come. Ora was fearfully down
about something. I believe she likes you better than any man she has
met over here. A little flirtation will do her no end of good.”

Valdobia coloured. He was as practical as most Italians, but by no
means given to the direct method of speech with women. Love simplifies
among other things, however, and after a moment he put down his cup and
looked her straight in the eyes.

“I think I shall take you into my confidence,” he said. “I know that
you are honest and that I can trust to your discretion----”

“You bet.”

Ida relaxed her spine with her speech and settled herself comfortably.

“And you could give me great assistance. I want to persuade your
friend--may I call her Ora to you? It is a beautiful name and I have
said it so often to myself----”

“Ora goes.”

“I want to persuade Ora to divorce her husband and marry me.”

“Aw--that is--Good Lord!” Ida sat up straight and nearly dropped her
cup. “That’s a large order.”

“Rather. But I--now--want nothing less. I am sick of the other sort of
thing, even if she were not too good for it. I want to marry--and she
is the only woman I ever have wanted to marry.”

“Hm. You Italians haven’t the name of being the best husbands in the
world. How long would you be faithful to her?”

“I have no intention of ever being anything else.”

“That’s what they all say--think, no doubt.”

“I shall be.” He spoke with intense conviction.

“Well, perhaps--you’ve lived your life. I should think you men would
get mighty sick of dancing about and never coming to anchor. But
divorce? There’s Mark, you know.”

“Her present husband?”

“Yes, and a rattling good fellow. He married Ora when she didn’t know
which way to turn, and she is really grateful to him, and as fond of
him as if he were her own brother. I don’t think she’ll turn him down.”

“Women have been known to desert their brothers before this! I mean to
make her love me, and if I do--how she could love a man!--I fancy I can
persuade her.”

“I like Mark and I don’t want to see him thrown down. He’s not what you
might call in love with Ora--he got discouraged pretty early in the
game. But he’s fond of her and proud of her, and he has ambitions. She
could help him a lot.”

Valdobia lit another cigarette.

“Better have a liaison and get over it. Then he’ll never know, and what
men don’t know don’t hurt them.”

“I shall do nothing of the sort. I mean to marry her. Will you help me
or not?”

“Ora’d look fine all right in that old palace of yours. It would suit
her a long sight better than Butte, or even Washington--let alone
Helena; Mark wouldn’t mind a bit being Governor of Montana. Have you
got a castle in the country?”

“I have several.”

“Fine! I’d visit you every year.”

“No one would be half as welcome.”

“I’ve been away from America so long and seen so much, and Butte seems
so far away, that I’ve kind of lost my bearings. If you’d come over
there and lay your siege, I guess I’d fight you to the last ditch.”

“Permit me to remind you that we are in Italy, a state several
centuries ahead of yours in civilisation, even if we lack your facile
divorce laws. I know something of Mr. Blake from Mrs. O’Neil. Can you
picture Ora finishing her life with him?”

“No, I can’t, and that’s a fact. I wonder there hasn’t been a grand
bust-up before this. It will come some day. Why not now?”

“Quite so.”

“And Mark could get a dozen girls to suit him better, make him nice and
comfy. He’ll never get any real companionship out of Ora, fine as she’s
always treated him. A man like that needs a running mate.”

“I shall waste none of my mental energy in sympathy for Mr. Mark Blake.
American husbands, so far as I have been permitted to observe, are
accustomed not only to being deserted for months and even years at a
time, but to periodical divorce.”

“It’s not quite as bad as that, but Mark has the elasticity of an india
rubber ball, and that’s a fact.”

“Good. Will you help me?”

Ida hesitated an instant longer, then, dimly conscious that her answer
in a measure was dictated by a profound instinct she made no attempt to
define, exclaimed, “It’s a go. I believe it will be all for the best.
Shake.” And she gave his hand a hearty grasp.

“You are a brick,” he murmured, with a sensation of gratitude he had
rarely experienced. “But there is one thing more. Please give her no
hint of this, for the present at least. Tell her, and make her believe
it, that I have not come here to trouble her, that she need never fear
to trust herself alone with me. Tell her that I only want to enjoy her
society and make things pleasant for her.”

“Right you are. Ora’s not the sort you can rush. But don’t overdo it
and make her think you’ve altogether got over it. Sometimes that piques
and works out all right and sometimes it don’t. She’s as proud as
Lucifer and might get over her fancy for you while she was still mad.”

“You do know your sex! I’ll use all the art I’ve ever acquired.”

“Respectful devotion without humility, and pained self-control. That’s
your lay.”

He laughed heartily. “We’ll drift for the present.”

“Well, now, drift out. I want to go up and sound her. I’m simply
expiring to know what she’s thinking about at the present moment.”