XVIII


“Give me your hand, Gregory. I am no coward, but this is the first time
I have ever been underground. My father would never permit it, nor my
mother after him.”

Gregory extended his long arm behind him and Ida’s warm firm fingers
clung to his hand. They had just left the skip at the second level of
his mine. The geologists and the newspaper men, together with herself,
Lord John, Gregory, and Mann, had entered the mine by way of the Primo
shaft, inspected the insignificant vein of copper which had merely
been blocked out, awaiting the possible erection of a concentrating
plant--for it was not worth the expense of freight to Anaconda--thence
down the ladder from the hole blasted by Apex, and into the drift
where the magnificent vein of Perch of the Devil also merely had been
blocked out; but for a more subtle reason. The case in Gregory’s favour
was so flagrant that the great men had laughed, although gracefully
submitting to interviews on the spot and expressing themselves with
as few technicalities as possible. That the Primo copper upon which
Apex had also sunk was a mere attenuated fork of the great vein which
indisputably had faulted from the original vein in Gregory Compton’s
property the reporters could see for themselves. Under the Apex law
Gregory was within his lateral rights in sinking under the adjoining
claim and thence under the Primo mine; and as far beyond as the vein
persisted.

Against a man less determined and resourceful than Gregory Compton
a wealthy corporation could obtain any verdict it demanded; but to
persist in a suit for Apex rights after this public exposition would
make any trust the laughing-stock of a continent. Even to persist
in the claim that he was mining under an agricultural patent, and
therefore outside his rights, would be mere petty persecution; and
inevitably both suits would steal noiselessly to limbo. Amalgamated
knew when it was beaten and would take its medicine with a grimace and
watch for its next opportunity.

Ida, although she disliked the sensation of being underground, the
chill of the tunnels and the drip of candle-grease on her smart linen
skirt, had been deeply impressed by the scene in the excavation on the
Perch vein: the men with their keen upturned faces, their peering eyes
so close to the moving candles, the little yellow flames travelling
along the beautiful yellow metal, the eager nervous hands of the
newspaper men, the intense blackness beyond the radius of the candles.
But her eyes returned constantly to her husband’s face. His eyes
gleamed with copper fires. His profile against the dark background of
the cavern looked as if carved in the rock by some prehistoric race.

The blood scorched her face and her heart leapt with pride as she heard
these distinguished men defer to him, express their admiration without
reserve. A year ago he had been as little known as when she married
him. Today his extraordinary abilities were recognised by the entire
country, and tomorrow he would be one of its colossi.

She was the only woman that had gone down. Mrs. Cameron and Mrs.
Collier had preferred to remain comfortably with Ora in the bungalow,
or to help her spread the tables under the pines, where luncheon was to
be served. Therefore was she privileged to keep close to the host, and
when they descended into the blackness of the second level she embraced
further her feminine prerogatives. Mann had gone down first, the guests
had followed, and Gregory, after a vain protest, had taken her down in
the skip when it returned for himself.

The rest of the party had pushed forward, for they had been promised a
surprise. Ida would have lingered, but Gregory pulled her on. He wanted
to hear the comments. The racket of the drills had stopped. Ida saw the
last of the guests disappear up a short ladder.

“Am I to go up into a stope?” she asked.

“If you want to see what we’ve come for.” He ran up the ladder, and she
followed, insinuated herself into the hole and stood upright in the
large excavation on the vein.

“Is it gold?” she gasped.

“No, but it’s a streak--a shoot--of chalcopyrite ten feet wide and of
the highest value. And it may go down eight or nine hundred feet before
it loses its richness and degenerates into a lower grade of ore. But
there may be millions of tons of that. This is one of the few great
shoots of chalcopyrite known.”

“Gregory!” said Ida ecstatically, “do you remember I always had such
faith in you that I urged you so often to prospect on the ranch that
you got quite cross?”

“Yes, I remember.”

“Never say I doubted you. I may be enchanted at all this success and
recognition of your abilities, but I have never had the least sensation
of surprise.”

Gregory smiled down into the eager beautiful face so close to his
shoulder. She had manipulated him down the ladder into the tunnel and
for the moment they were alone. “I hope you are half as proud of me as
I am of you,” he said gallantly, although he was a trifle uneasy; not
because she looked as if she might kiss him there in the semi-dark, but
because he felt an impulse to kiss her. For the moment he regretted the
wild romance upon which he was embarked, the torments of its present,
the tragic possibilities of its future. Ida now would make an ideal
wife, demanding far less of his jealously guarded inner self, to say
nothing of his time, than Ora, who had that most terrible of all gifts,
a passionate soul. But this disloyalty was brief, and he frowned and
disengaged his hand, although he was far from suspecting that Ida had
yielded to the temptation to pay him deliberate court.

“I shall be able to give you a string of pearls before long,” he said
lightly, “or a million or two to play with. I want to hear what these
men have to say. Suppose you go back with Lord John, and tell them that
we are coming up soon for lunch. Ring the bell in the station twice for
the skip and three times for hoist.”

Ida shrank back against the wall as if she had been struck, but when
Lord John, who had made several futile attempts to separate her from
her husband, came eagerly forward, she left Gregory to the chorus of
enthusiasm and congratulation, and obeyed his directions.