XXVII


The next day Gregory visited a mine in Lewis and Clark County which
recently had shut down, and bought a compressor at second hand. His
miners with the air drills were soon working at five times the rate
of speed that had been possible with the hand drills. The contractor
in charge of the development work on what was impudently known as the
Apex Mine, had installed a gasoline hoist, every new device, and as
large a force as it was possible at that early stage to employ with
profit. Gregory interviewed Osborne and Douglas, and obtained profuse
assurances, but Mann soon discovered that there was an increased force
on the Primo copper vein. Their original lease was nearly up but they
had accepted Mark’s offer of two months’ grace; an offer he deeply
regretted now, but the papers were signed and sealed. They made a feint
of pushing the drift across the fault, but as they employed a small
force at that point there was little room for doubt that they had been
amply compensated for a doubtful undertaking.

Meanwhile work on the great surface chamber of Perch of the Devil
Mine was drawing to a close. It had proved to be a hundred feet long,
thirty feet wide, and seventy feet deep, and had netted half a million
dollars. Some time since one of the larger houses on the West Side in
Butte, built by a millionaire while still faithful to Montana, but
whose family now spent twelve months of the year in Europe, New York,
or California, had been thrown on the market for less than a third of
its cost; new millionaires are not as plentiful in Amalgamated Butte
as of old, and that unique camp is still a perch, even for those that
make moderate fortunes; if no longer for the devil. It never will be
a favourite roost for the gamecock’s hens and chicks. The hotels and
“blocks” are always overcrowded, and even bungalows are in demand by
the energetic but impermanent young engineers and managers of the
various companies; but “palatial residences,” built by enthusiastic
citizens who either died promptly or retired in favour of their
families, are a drug on that great market they helped to build. When
the Murphy house, therefore, was advertised for sale Gregory bought it
for Ida and cabled her the news together with five thousand dollars
Mark had recently made for him on the stock-market.

Above these and other expenditures, he now had half a million dollars
to his credit, but he wanted a million more. The new vein was very rich
for chalcopyrite, but its depth was problematical, and it might drop in
values at any moment. If his belief in his hill was justified and there
were huge primary deposits below, there would be no end to his riches;
but it would take a year or more to determine that point; and meanwhile
he wanted at least a million and a half, not only to meet the possible
expenses of litigation, but to mine at depth and to open up his other
claims in case Amalgamated, when it reached the chalcopyrite vein,
claimed that it apexed in their property, got out an injunction, and
forced him to cease work on it.

But he had another and to him a still more vital reason for wishing
to make a great sum of money. Half a million dollars, particularly
when spectacularly acquired, alters a man’s position in his community
at once, and the readjustment of his own mental attitude toward life
follows as a matter of course; particularly in a country where money
not only talks but rules. He was now treated, when business took him
to any of the towns, as a permanent capitalist of the great state of
Montana; moreover, his romantic attitude toward his hill having been
inevitably dampened by its yield of mere copper, his appreciation of
its heavy contribution to his bank account was wholly practical. He not
only began to forecast himself as one of the small group of front-rank
millionaires which Montana has donated to the American Brotherhood of
Millionaires, but to be sensible of the sudden and active growth of
those business instincts he had always known were dormant in his brain.
It had needed but the rousing of his fighting instinct, the success of
its first move, and the swift countermove of the enemy, to awaken the
permanent desire, not alone to pit his brains against Amalgamated, but
to show the world what he could do. In short he was on his mettle, and
conscious for the first time of his powers and ultimate ambitions.

He had found his mine by an accident. Nature had flung it into his
lap. He was now determined to prove that he could make money with the
resources of his brain as rapidly as the more famous of the Montanans
had made it in the past, when opportunities were supposed to be more
numerous. There never was a time when opportunity did not coincide
with the man, and of this Gregory was contemptuously aware when he
dismissed the usual Wall Street resource as commonplace, beneath the
consideration of a man living in a state whose resources had barely
been tapped.

When live brains of peculiar gifts think hard and uninterruptedly on
a given subject they become magnets. Gregory paid frequent visits
to Butte and Helena, talking casually with many men. In less than a
fortnight he found his cue, and, accompanied by a civil engineer,
disappeared for a week.