II


Ida was not given to imaginative excursions, but during the three
days’ journey from New York to Butte, she made no acquaintances,
resting in the seclusion of her drawing-room; and after she had read
all the magazines her mind began to people itself. Although the ladies
of Butte, whom she now regarded as equals, moved along the central
highway, Gregory was always turning the corners, and she visualised
him most frequently advancing hurriedly toward the station as the
train entered--both late, of course. She rehearsed the meeting many
times, never without a pricking sense of awkwardness, for she now
fully realised that when a woman and her husband have not communicated
save on the wire for nearly a year, the first interview is liable
to constraint. He always had been difficult to talk to. Would he be
bored if she tried to entertain him as Ora would entertain Mark: with
such excerpts of their many experiences as a confiding husband might
appreciate? She never had understood him. Out of her greater knowledge
of the world and men should she be better able to fathom the reserves
of that strange silent nature--or did she really care whether she could
or not? Although she had made up her mind to greet him at the station
with the warmth of an old friend, and flatter him with her delight in
returning home, she had not the faintest idea how she should carry off
the long evening--if the train were on time.

It was not. Probably no Northwestern train has arrived on time in
the history of the three railroads. Ida’s train, due at seven in
the evening, arrived at midnight. Her Pullman was at the end of the
long dark platform, and as she walked slowly toward the station
building--which looked like the bunk-house of an abandoned mining camp
in the desert--searching for someone to carry her hand baggage--porters
being non-existent in the Northwest--she saw neither Gregory nor
any other familiar face. For the first time in her life she felt a
disposition to cry. But as she tossed her head higher and set her
lips, a young man approached and asked if she were Mrs. Gregory
Compton. He was a pleasant looking youth, and she was so grateful to be
called by name that she forgot her new reserve and replied emphatically
that she was.

“I am your chauffeur,” he said. “Your new car arrived a few days ago,
and Mr. Compton ’phoned me to meet you. Have you any hand baggage?”

Ida indicated her portmanteau and hat box in the dark perspective and
went on to inspect her car. It was a handsome limousine, lighted with
electricity, and for a moment she took a childish pleasure in examining
its fittings. But as the man returned and piled her baggage in front
she asked irrepressibly:

“Is Mr. Compton not in Butte?”

“No, ma’am. He hasn’t been in Butte for weeks. Lively times out at the
mine, I guess.”

“And my house? Had I not better go to a hotel?”

“Oh, the house is all right. Mr. Compton’s secretary ’phoned to an
agency, and they put in three or four in help. I guess you’ll find
everything all right.”

Ida entered her car, but scowled at its luxuries. By this time she
was “mad clean through.” “The famous American husband!” she thought,
gritting her teeth. “Best in the world--not. If it’s my horse, my dog,
my wife with an Englishman, it’s business first last and always with an
American. European men are courteous whether they mean it or not, but
Americans only remember to be polite when they have time. Ten months
and he can’t leave his mine long enough to meet me when I arrive at
midnight!”

Her pleasure in returning to Butte had turned as flat as spilt
champagne. She did not even glance at the gay electric signs and
midnight activities of Broadway as her car rolled through that
sleepless thoroughfare toward the West Side. But when her chauffeur,
who had ignored the speed limit, stopped abruptly before a large house
of admirable architecture and blazing with lights, her face flushed
with excitement and she forgot her recalcitrant spouse. The door was
opened at once and two maid servants ran down the steps. They were
young, neatly dressed and capped, and it was evident that their service
was dictated not only by curiosity but by sympathy.

“Welcome home, ma’am,” one of them, a Swede, said shyly as Ida stepped
to the pavement. “It’s too bad your train was so late. The cook’s got a
nice hot supper for you.”

Ida, who was not easily touched, felt as grateful to these smiling
girls as to her friendly chauffeur, and for a moment was tempted to
“come down off her perch” and revel in human companionship. But she
knew that it “wouldn’t work”; she merely thanked them graciously and
ascended the wide steps of her new home, that palatial residence of
cream-colored pressed brick of her unswerving desires. While the maids
were taking her bags and boxes upstairs, she walked through the large
rooms of the lower floor. Everything was in the best modern style of
furnishing, the prevailing tone dim and rich, with Eastern rugs on the
hardwood floors; French tapestries and carved oak furniture and stained
glass in the library--also a few books; paler tapestries set in panels
in the immense drawing-room, and many beautiful pieces of furniture
carefully selected with an eye to both contrast and mating. Out of
this room opened a dining-room that looked like a baronial hall, and
although the Murphys had taken their silverware they had left their
china, imported from Limoges, and their glass ware, made for them by a
Venetian firm that had supplied Ida’s grandes dames for thirty years.
In short it was one of those stately and sumptuous interiors, furnished
by the best houses in New York, which one associates exclusively with
the three or four great cities of the United States, and is always
unwarrantably surprised to find in the newer cities of the West.

Ida made a pretence of eating her dainty supper, remembered that she
was now a grande dame and visited the kitchen to say an appreciative
word to the cook, then ascended to her bedroom divided between anger
and a depression so foreign to her temperament that she barely
recognised it for what it was.

The large upper hall had been fitted up as a billiard room, and with a
continuous divan broken only by the doors of the bedrooms. Ida threw
it an appreciative glance, but it merely emphasised the fact that
there was no man in the house, and she did not linger. Mrs. Murphy,
evidently a brunette, had furnished her bedroom and dressing-room in
primrose yellow and much lace. Ida approved both as unreservedly as
she had the rest of the house, thankful there was nothing to alter;
like many women she had consummate taste in dress and none whatever
for house decoration; although unlike most of these disparate ladies
she was quite aware of her deficiencies. She knew when a room was all
that it should be, but could not have conceived one of the details,
much less the unimpeachable combination. The sex instinct teaches
those subtleties of personal adornment likely to allure the male, and
arrest the anxious eye of other females, but ancestral brain-cells are
necessary for the more civilised accomplishment.

Ida’s eyes fell on the telephone beside her bed and lingered. She
forgot her beautiful room and the successive throbs of gratified
ambition, in an overwhelming desire to call up Gregory and tell him
what she thought of him. But she was a woman in whom calculation
was stronger than impulse, and in the past year she had learned to
control her temper, not only because a carefully nourished refinement
had crowded out some of the weeds of her nature, but because her
ever-growing intelligence despised lack of self-control in all things.
So she merely undressed herself, her eyes wandering every few minutes
to the telephone. It was incredible that he did not ring her up. That,
at least, would take but a few moments of his precious time.

However, she fell asleep immediately after her bath, and it was the
telephone bell that awakened her at eight o’clock. This time she
frowned at it, for she wanted to sleep; but she sat up, put the
receiver to her ear and asked languidly: “Well?”

A strange man’s voice replied: “Is this Mrs. Compton?”

“Yes. Why am I disturbed so early?”

“I’m sorry--this is Mr. Compton’s secretary speaking--but Mr. Compton
told me to call you at eight o’clock. He always comes in for breakfast
at this time--here he is.”

“Hello! How are you? What time did you get in?” Gregory’s voice was
elaborately polite and as eager as any lover’s of yesteryear.

“Are you interested?” Ida’s heart beat thickly, but her tones were
crisp. “I arrived at midnight. Really, I expected you to meet me. That
is generally considered the decent thing to do.”

“Oh! I’m sorry it was impossible. I can’t leave the mine at present.
How did you like the house?”

“I am enchanted with it--and with the limousine. When are you coming
in?”

“I can’t say at present. I dare not leave for a moment. You will find a
deposit to your credit at the Daly bank.”

“Thanks. Would--shall I run out?”

“Better not. There is always danger of rows.”

“But of course I’m wild to see the mine. You forget how famous it is.”

“Better wait awhile. It really isn’t safe.”

“Very well. How’s your wound? Where were you hurt, anyhow?”

“Not worth mentioning, as I cabled you, and I suppose you got my
telegram in New York saying I was all right again. Sure you got
everything you want?”

“I am overwhelmed by all this luxury, and your generosity.”

“Glad you like it. Has Mrs. Blake gone to California?”

“She went directly from the steamer. How is Mark getting on. I’ve had
only notes from Ora.”

“All right. He doesn’t write but has telegraphed once or twice. He’d
better stay below several months. Write Mrs. Blake to persuade him to
take things easy. He had a close call. I can get along without him for
awhile, but I can’t afford to lose him. Will you see to this?”

“I’ll write Ora today. She’s in no hurry to return to Butte--was
delighted at the prospect of going to California, and intends to take
Mark to Santa Barbara, where she knows a lot of people.”

“Ah! Good. Well, I must get some breakfast. Amuse yourself.”

“And you won’t be in for several days?”

“Afraid not. Good-bye.”

Ida set the receiver back on the table, but it was some minutes before
she lay down again. She sat thinking, with compressed lips. Born
with intuitive knowledge of men, she had, as she once remarked to
Ora, turned a goodly number of them inside out during the past year.
Gregory Compton did not intend to live with her again. She knew this
as conclusively as if his kind matter-of-fact tones had expressed the
direct message. Before she left home it never had occurred to Ida to
wonder if her husband still loved her or not, and she had learned to
accept his consuming masculine interest in matters mineralogic as all
in the day’s work. Now she wondered if he had ceased to love her then
or since. That he took no further interest in her as a woman, although
amiably determined to do his duty as her legal provider, would have
been almost patent to an imagination as riotous as Ora’s; to Ida,
practical and clear-sighted, there was not a loophole for delusion.

In a few moments she relaxed the tension of her body and lay down.

“Well!” she thought impatiently, “what’s the matter with me, anyhow?
Isn’t it what I always hopefully looked forward to? Did I ever pretend
to be anything but resigned--or to be in love with him after the first
few weeks? I guess I’m spoiled with too much devotion, that’s what.
Seeing too many men lose their heads. Much their old heads are worth.
But I guess I don’t like being turned down for once. Goose. It’s my lay
to cut out pique and sing a song of thanksgiving that I’ve got pretty
nearly everything I ever romanced about and set my mind on. It’s a
pretty good old world when things come your way, and women’ll never be
happy till they learn to put men in the same place that men put us--on
a handy little side-track. I’ve got a whole parlour car instead of an
upper berth like some poor devils, so I’ll quit whining. But if there’s
another woman in the case, let them both look out--that’s all!”