XIII


Reaction, after the emotional recognition of the subtle but certain
change that had been wrought in her unsuspected depths, had filled Ida
for many hours with a sullen rage against Gregory Compton and herself.
But in a day or two the buoyancy of youth and the common sense, of
which she possessed an uncommon store, asserted themselves, and, while
devoting her time to the small daily distractions of society, her
determination to win back her husband never waned for a moment. She
knew that she must play the waiting game, keep a sharp eye out for the
blessed opportunity and pounce upon it, but make no attempt to “rush
things.”

The day after the Apex mine closed down, she rang him up and offered
her congratulations, told him something of the excitement in Butte,
then rang off before he began to feel detained. As he passed through
Butte later, on his way to Helena, he could do no less than call on
her, and, to his relief and her secret rage, he found several pleasant
people taking tea in the library. But she showed her pride in him so
frankly that he could not but be flattered, and talked so intelligently
of the undoubted sequel of the battle underground that he forgot her
guests and addressed his conversation to her. She drew him on to
describe that grim but picturesque episode underground, and he would
have been less than man had he failed to be sensible of the rise of
his chest while surrounded by a breathless circle of charming women.
When they were about to withdraw tactfully and leave him alone with
his wife, he glanced at his watch, bade them all a hasty good-bye and
bolted out to catch his train. Ida once more had been able to exhibit
to her little world an evidence of the pleasant understanding between
herself and her busy husband, and got what consolation out of this fact
that she could.

“I can wait,” she thought grimly. “I can wait! I guess patience is my
one all-wool-and-a-yard-wide virtue. I’ll wait!”

She gave several small dinners and a dancing party, devoted to the new
excitement of “ragging,” in which no one became more proficient than
herself. She “went” harder than ever, and even joined the more extreme
younger set (elegantly known as “The Bunch”) one night in a progress
among the road houses of The Flat, and danced in the ballroom of the
Five Mile House until dawn. But she had no real taste for this side
of life; and did penance by visiting the Poor Farm and several other
charities under the wing of Mrs. Cameron. Her popularity on all sides
was unchallenged, and not only was she firmly established in the city
of her heart, but Mrs. Cameron had offered to take a house with her in
New York for the following winter if she cared to mount still higher.
She was gratified and grateful, but she was filled with that desperate
loneliness that only a man can banish.

On the night of the opera she wore black velvet unrelieved and never
had looked handsomer. The neck of the apparently inseverable gown was
cut square, and her beautiful arms were exposed as far to the top as
fashion permitted; she wore her hair banded closely about her head,
and, at the base of her throat, a barbaric necklace of dull red and
blue stones that she had picked up in an antiquity shop in Munich. As
she sat in her box between Mrs. Cameron and Mrs. Collier, one of the
handsomest and best dressed of the younger women of Butte, Gregory, who
sat behind and facing the house, saw that during the first entr’acte
the audience levelled its glasses at her constantly, and that,
indisputably, she divided the honours of the night with the prima donna.

He looked at her more than once himself, her classic beauty, or the
classic effect she made it produce, appealing to his æsthetic sense as
beauty in any form always did. He wondered a little that it should so
have lost its once irresistible appeal to his senses, wondered again
if he could not still have loved her well enough to live with had Ora
never entered his life. Certainly he was very proud of her, and her
conversation as well as her personality interested him. He respected
her profoundly for what she had achieved, giving her full credit for
the revolution in appearance, manners, and speech, in spite of her
exceptional opportunities. Then he forgot her as his thoughts wandered
to Ora, whom he saw sitting alone in her warm shadowy room, in which he
had come to feel so much at home. As he always went to her when he was
tired, after a day filled with excitement or hard physical labour, he
experienced only peace and content in her nearness; but when away, as
tonight, and with the music of Thaïs singing into his keen responsive
nerves, he was filled with an inexpressible longing.

He was roused by a faint exclamation from Ida. She was leaning forward.
A moment later a man, whom he had never seen before and who looked like
an Englishman of distinction, silently entered the box. Ida left her
chair, and gave him both her hands in greeting, then went with him out
into the passageway where their conversation would not interfere with
her guests’ enjoyment of the music.

Gregory felt very much like any other husband at that moment. He
was conscious of no sting of jealousy, or stab of doubt, but he did
not like it. He also received a distinct impression that his rights
of proprietorship were menaced. Moreover, he was so invaded by mere
curiosity that it was with difficulty he refrained from gratifying it
at once. But, although he belonged to the type of Western man who would
shoot the filcher of his woman without an instant’s consideration, he
was the last man in the world to make a fool of himself.

Ida tried his patience but a few moments. As soon as the curtain fell
she re-entered the box and presented the stranger as Lord John Mowbray,
who had arrived by the evening train and sought the opera house as a
relief from the hotel. She did not add that he had telephoned at once
to her house and followed her as quickly as he could change his clothes.

The husband was the last to be made known to the distinguished
stranger, and in spite of Mowbray’s ability to look vacuous, and
Gregory’s to look like a graven image, neither could repress a spark
under his lowered lids. Mowbray reared his haughty crest at once and
turned away. Like many young Englishman he blushed easily, and he was
by no means the first man to feel uncomfortable under the eyes of
Gregory Compton. He felt the colour rising to his white forehead, and
was not sorry to present his splendid back and length of limb to that
searching gaze.

He sat close to Ida during the last act, and then the party went to her
house to supper, there being no restaurant worthy the name in Butte.
Gregory detained Ida at the door after the other had entered.

“Good night,” he said. “Luning promised to wait for me at his office. I
shall talk to him until it is time to catch the train for Pony.”

“Oh, I am so sorry,” said Ida politely, and smiling charmingly. “So
will the others be. And I wanted you to talk to Lord John. His brother
has a ranch in Wyoming, and he has come here on some mining business.
I am so glad to see him again. The men here are--well, they are all
right, but quite absorbed in one thing only--whatever their profession
or business happens to be. Lord John knows a little about everything. I
am sure you would like him. Do ask me to take him out to the mine. He
is a friend of Ora’s, too. She will ask us if you don’t.”

“Come whenever you like. If I’m not there my foreman will show you
round. Good night.” And he was off. Ida, feeling that Mowbray’s arrival
had been timed by Providence, went in to her guests.