XIII


Several weeks passed before Ora sent for Miss Ruby Miller. She was
busier during those weeks than she had been for many months. Ida came
every other day at one o’clock and remained until five. They carved
wood in the attic, and looked at pictures or read in the library during
the hour and a half that included tea. Ida confessed that during the
latter interval she was so bored sometimes she could scream, but added
that she would stick it out if she yawned every tooth in her head
loose. One thing that never bored her was the picture of Ora--her
working blouse changed for a dainty house gown--presiding at the
tea-table. She studied every detail, every gesture; she even cultivated
a taste for tea, which heretofore she had regarded as fit for invalids
only, like jellies and cup-custard.

Ora’s alternate days and many of her evenings were filled with social
duties. Butte was indulging in one of its hurricanes of festivity.
Mrs. O’Hagan, who lived in the largest and finest house on the West
Side, gave a series of dinner dances. Mrs. Burke, who owned the big
ugly red house of appalling architecture built by Judge Stratton in the
eighties, gave several entertainments in honour of two young visitors
from Denver. Mrs. Maginnis, who lived in another palatial residence
far west and far from the old Stratton house--which in its day had
expressed the extreme limit of the city, as of fashion--gave a ball as
brilliant as anything Ora had seen in a distant hemisphere. Flowers
may be scarce in Butte, but flowers and palms may be imported by the
carload from Helena, and the large rooms looked like an oasis in the
grey desert of Butte. Every woman wore a ball gown made by some one of
the great reiterative masters, and there were no wall flowers; for,
although the tango had not yet set the whole world dancing, the women
of Montana never had interpreted grey hairs as a signal to retire.

It was on the day after this ball that Ora had telephoned to Miss
Miller. “Can you give me an hour or two tomorrow?” she asked.

“Sure. Can I come early? I’ve got fourteen heads to dress for the
Cameron ball, and most of them want a facial too?”

“A what?”

“Face massage, and touchin’ up generally.”

“Oh.”

“It’s fine. Makes you feel as good as you look. What did you want me to
do?”

“Ob, shampoo my hair. I want to consult you about it, too--and
manicure.”

“Well, I’ll bring the creams along, and if you want a massage I’ll be
ready.”

Ora had succeeded in making Miss Miller propose what she had quite made
up her mind to try, and she rang off with a smile. The evening before
she had thought herself the plainest woman at the party, and the effect
of this discouraging conclusion had been to kill her animation and
sag her shoulders until she knew she must look as dowdy as she felt.
For the first time she realised how a blighted vanity may demoralise
the proudest intellect. It was time to get a move on, as her new but
rapidly developing friend would put it.

Ora was very proud of her work. She gave Professor Whalen due credit,
and knew that Ida toiled at her exercises, but doubted if the
uninspiring pedant would have been retained had it not been for the
sense of emulation, slightly tinctured by jealousy, she managed to
rouse in her new boon companion when they were together. But Ida was
now exercising something of her latent force of character, determined
to make the most of advantages for which she knew many a sudden-rich
woman would “give her eye teeth.” She would polish up “good and plenty”
before her husband made his strike; and waste no precious time on the
inside of her skull when she had the cash to spend on its outside.

After the first week she dropped no more g’s, her grammar rapidly
improved, and although she never would be a stylist, nor altogether
forswear slang, not only because the ready-made phrase appealed to her
unliterary mind, but because its use was ingrained, she reserved it
more and more for those that best could appreciate it. As it annoyed
Professor Whalen excessively, she went afield for new phrases “for the
fun of seeing him wriggle.”

On the other hand, whenever she felt in the mood, she gazed at him with
penitent languid eyes, promised never to use slang again, and amused
herself racking other nerves. She knew just how far to go and “turned
him off,” or “switched him back on to the track” before any real harm
was done. Some day she might let him make a scene just for the fun of
the thing, but not until she was “good and ready.”

Her feeling for Ora was more difficult to define. Sometimes she almost
loved her, not only inspired by gratitude, but because Ora’s personal
magnetism was intensified by every charm of refinement, vivacity,
mental development, as well as by a broad outlook on life and a
sweetness of manner which never infuriated her by becoming consciously
gracious. At other times she hated her, for she knew that no such
combination ever could be hers. Ora was a patrician born of patricians.
She might go to the devil, preside over one of the resorts down on
The Flat, take to drink and every evil way, and still would she be
patrician. Herself might step into millions and carry her unsullied
virtue to her grave and she never would be the “real thing.” For the
first time she understood that being “a lady” had little to do with
morals or behaviour. Nothing irritates the complacent American more
than the sudden appreciation of this fact.

“But I guess I’ll be as good as some others,” Ida consoled herself.
“After all, I don’t see so many Ora Blakes lying round loose. People
don’t bother much these days if your clothes make their mouth water and
your grammar don’t queer you.”

Gregory, when he had time to think about it--he read even at the
breakfast and dinner-table, and had an assay plant in the cellar--was
charmed with her improvement, and told her abruptly one day that if
she kept faithfully to her tasks until November he would give her the
thousand dollars he had received under the will of his aunt. “And you
can do what you like with it,” he added. “I shan’t ask you. That’s the
way I enjoyed money when I was a kid, and I guess women are much the
same.”

“A thousand dollars!” Ida was rigid, her mouth open. “Geewhil--I beg
pardon--My! But you are good!” She paused to rearrange her thoughts,
which were in danger of flying off into language her husband was paying
to remodel. “Can I really do anything with it I like?”

“You can.” He smiled at her bright wide-open eyes and flaming cheeks.

“I ain’t--haven’t said anything about it as I didn’t think it would be
any sort of use, but Ora is going to Europe in the fall, and she told
me Mark was going to try to persuade you to let me go with her. Now I
can go on my thousand dollars, if you don’t mind. Mark wants you to
stay with him.”

“He spoke to me about it--I had forgotten. There couldn’t be a better
arrangement. This is the time for you to go to Europe--while your mind
is still plastic.”

“You don’t seem to mind my going a little bit.” Rapture gave place to
suspicion. Ida was not born with faith in man.

“My dear child! What good am I to you now? You might be keeping house
for a deaf mute. All I need is the right kind of food and a comfortable
bed. I’ll get both at Mark’s. Next year you would see even less of
me than you do now. We get our last and most practical drilling in
ore-dressing, metallurgy, power-utilisation, and geology. We shall
be off half the time on geological expeditions, visits to mines in
other parts of the state, smelters, the most up-to-date of the cyanide
mills. So you see how much I shall be at home. Go to Europe and enjoy
yourself.”

“All right. I’ll go. You bet. And I’ll not miss a trick. There’ll never
be a thousand dollars better spent.”