XXIII


Ida had broken a dinner engagement and sat alone in her library. She
knew that Gregory had passed through Butte that day on his way from
Helena to Pony; she had seen him leave the Block where his lawyers
had their offices and jump into a waiting taxi. He was not the man to
take a cab for anything but an imminent train. She had rushed home,
but he had neither called nor telephoned. She reasoned that he would
be more than man if he were not reluctant to see her again after their
last embarrassing interview, that there was no cause for fresh doubts,
and that there was literally nothing for her to do at present but
continue to play her waiting game. But she felt both sad and nervous,
and wondered if it were in her to despair, to “cut and run” like
other women; or whether it might not be wise to absent herself for a
time. Gregory was the sort of man to appreciate delicacy, and after
an absence of two months they would meet quite naturally. She could
visit Yellowstone and Glacier Park, and send him pleasant impersonal
postcards.

But although she hesitated to acknowledge it, she was tired of her
waiting game, she wished that “fate would get a move on”, and she had
left her husband once with unforeseen results. She leaned her elbows
on her knees and pressed her hands against her face. She had always
cherished a high opinion of her cleverness in regard to men, but she
was nonplussed. For a woman of her resource there should be some
alternative to waiting. She knew that she had made a deep impression
on her husband in that momentous interview, but who could say that he
had not deliberately put the memory of it out of his mind? Certainly
there was no sign that it had softened him or paved the way for her
reinstatement into his life.

She was alarmed at her waning self-control. During these last few days
she barely had been able to play her part in society; the people at
the various functions she had attended had seemed to her confused and
absent mind like marionettes that she could sweep off the stage with
her arm, and she had retreated into her shell lest she insult them
irreparably.

She brought her heavy brows together. Could there be another woman
after all? Gregory was cleverer than any detective. Why should it occur
to him to suggest divorce, he a man so absorbed in a mine that he had
forgotten how to live--merely out of consideration for a discarded wife
whose existence he generally managed to forget? It was certainly odd,
and its idiosyncrasies grew and swelled as she brooded. She wondered
if she had been a fool. But who in heaven’s name could the woman be?
Of course it was only a passing fancy, but could she wait, _could she
wait_?

She was aroused by a slight cough, discreet but full of subtle
insolence. She sprang to her feet, and Whalen smiled as he saw her
drawn face and bloodshot eyes. He stood just within the door, and held
a cap in his hand. He wore a light automobile coat; a pair of goggles
only half covered his bulging brow. His upper teeth were clamped down
over his lower lip, a habit when steadying his nerves. Ida thought she
had never seen him look so hideous, so like a mongrel cur.

“What do you want?” she asked.

“How gracious you are! How like Mrs. Blake, who would not forget her
manners if she----”

“I’ve got no manners for your sort. Get out.”

“Oh, not yet. I’ve something to say. I’ve waited for over a year, but
my time has come----”

“You’ll go out the way you went last time if you don’t say what you’ve
got to say pretty quick and get out by yourself.”

Whalen looked over his shoulder nervously, and measured the distance
to the front door. He had asked leave of the maid to announce himself,
and, when she had disappeared, reopened the door and left it ajar.

“It won’t take me long,” he said grimly. “It took me a little longer to
tell Mrs. Blake, for she was hard to convince; but she _was_ convinced
before I left. It is merely this: I saw you go into Lord John Mowbray’s
rooms on Monday night shortly after ten o’clock and come out at
half-past one.”

“Oh, you did, did you? I had a feeling all the time there was a sneak
in the neighbourhood. Well, much good your spying will do you. Lord
John was at the Country Club until three in the morning and everybody
knows it.”

She spoke calmly, but she was profoundly disturbed. She continued,
however, in the same tones of cutting contempt, for she saw that he was
taken aback, “I merely misunderstood an invitation of Lord John’s for
a bridge party. I thought it was for that night, and although I was
surprised to find myself the first and Lord John not there, I sat down
to wait and fell asleep. I had had a hard day. I only condescend to
explain,” she continued witheringly, “because you are as venomous as a
mad dog and it is as well to muzzle you at once.”

“I don’t believe a word of that yarn, and neither will anyone else. I
certainly managed to convince Mrs. Blake----”

“Not she. She must have laughed in your face----”

“Oh no! Not Mrs. Blake! But I will admit that it was not easy to make
her believe ill of you. Perhaps I should not have succeeded, but when a
woman is eager to believe----” He laughed and shrugged his shoulders;
but once more he cast a quick glance at the line of retreat. The heavy
library table was between them.

“What the devil do you mean?” Ida spoke roughly, but her heart began to
hammer. She felt a sudden impulse to run away, but she stood rigidly
and glared at him. “Here!” she continued, “come to the point. Spit
out your poison. What particular object had you in trying to set my
best friend against me? It would have been more like you to run to a
newspaper.”

“That later. I wanted to do Mrs. Blake a good turn and at the same
time let her be the one to tell your husband that he could secure his
freedom without further delay----”

“What do you mean? What do you mean?” Ida’s eyes were staring as if
they saw a vision of herself at the stake; she tossed off her pride
as she would a hampering cloak. “Ora! Ora! Oh, not Ora! You liar!”
she screamed. “Prove what you said quick----” But he saw that she had
caught the edge of the table and that her body was swaying.

“Oh, neither will deny it now,” he replied in a tone of deadly quiet.
“She went out there to be near him, no doubt of that; and he’s spent
hours on end in that bungalow. I went to Helena and back with him and I
guessed that something was up, for he was glummer and more disagreeable
than usual; and this afternoon when I saw her come up out of his mine
I guessed they had had a painful scene and parted. So I told her she
had the game in her own hands, and that I’d go on the stand and swear
to what I saw. No husband would believe anything but the truth, nor
this town either. You might prove that your lord made a fool of you and
amused himself elsewhere, but you’re done for all the same; and I guess
Mr. Compton would manage his divorce all right. Then two people that
are madly in love will be happy----”

Ida’s strength rushed back and the world turned scarlet. She picked
up a heavy bronze from the table and hurled it at him. But Whalen was
expecting a physical assault in some form. He ducked and fled. When she
reached the open door he was not in sight.