XX


On the morning following the departure of the geologists Gregory took
the bit between his teeth and went in to Butte to see his wife. In his
first moment of shock and confusion it had seemed to him best that Ora,
whose subtlety he recognised, was the one to manipulate Ida’s still too
formalistic mind toward the divorce court; but he was unaccustomed to
relegate any part of his affairs to others, least of all to a woman.
Nor did he think it necessary to inform Ora of his sudden decision.
He might work almost double shift to keep her out of his thoughts and
diminish temptation, and he might marry her and continue to love her
passionately; but she would obtain little ascendency over him. He knew
what he wanted; he had trained his will until at times it appeared
formidable even to himself, and he was as nearly the complete male that
regards woman, however wonderful, as the supplementary female as still
survives.

He had few illusions about himself, and it had crossed his mind more
than once, since the hope of divorce had dazzled both of them, that
for a year or two or least there must be a certain amount of friction
between a nature like his and a complex, super-civilised, overgrown
feminine ego like Ora Blake. While he had sat with his legs stretched
out to the fire and his eyes half closed, his body weary, but mentally
alert, he had received certain definite impressions of an independent
almost anarchical mind, contemptuous of the world and its midges save
as they might be of use to herself; of a mind too well-bred ever to
be managing and exacting in any vulgar sense, but inexorable in its
desires and as unscrupulous in their pursuit as her father had been; of
a superlative refinement coupled with a power of intense and reckless
passion found only in women possessing that quality of imagination that
exalts and idealises the common mortal attributes. Moreover, it was a
mind that, the first joy of submission and surrender diminished, would
think for itself.

Until that night when both had dropped the mask for a moment he had
never thought of her as a complicated ego, merely as one from whom
he felt temporarily separated after a union of centuries; and it had
been the reluctant admission that he knew her very little, save as a
gracious woman and his own companion, that had enabled him to school
himself to spend long hours with her alone as before. He had tumbled
blindly into matrimony once, and no matter how much he might love this
woman, to whom he had seemed from the first to be united by a secret
and ancient bond, he was determined none the less to marry the second
time with his eyes wide open.

But although his glimpses of Ora’s winding depths gave him moments of
uneasiness he always fell back upon the complacent reflection that he
was a man, a man, moreover, with a cast-iron will, and that the woman
did not live who would not have to adapt herself to him did he take her
to wife.

Until the day before the party at the mines he had been content to
drift, but a certain moment down in his own mine had given a new and
abrupt turn to both thoughts and purpose. Ida might have spared herself
her agonies of shame: she had not betrayed her love, but she had given
him a distinct impression that she was employing her redoubtable
feminine weapons to reduce him to his old allegiance. He had remembered
for a poignant moment that he once had loved this woman to distraction,
and during that moment he saw her again as the most beautiful and
distracting of her sex. His brief surrender had filled him with fury.
He had no intention of despising himself. From boyhood up he had had
nothing but contempt for the man that did not know his own mind. If
it had not been for this serene confidence in himself, he, who was
constitutionally wary in spite of the secret and wistful springs of
romance in his nature and the apparent suddenness of his bold plunges,
never would have married Ida Hook, nor any woman, until he had sounded
her thoroughly. But he had behaved like any hot-headed and conceited
young fool, and, much as he now admired Ida, it both infuriated him and
appalled him to feel even for a moment toward her as he had in his raw
inexperienced youth.

He therefore made up his mind to go to her like a rational being and
ask her to give him his freedom. They had made a mistake. They were
reasonable members of an advanced civilisation, where mistakes were
recognised and rectified whenever possible. He did not doubt for a
moment that reason and logic must appeal as forcibly to a woman as to
himself.

The door of his wife’s house was opened after the usual delay, and the
maid told him that Mrs. Compton was upstairs in the billiard room “or
somewheres.” He took the stairs three steps at a time lest his courage
evaporate; but drew a long breath of relief when he entered the large
square hall and saw nothing of Ida. He would have rung for the maid,
but reflected that no doubt he had already provided enough gossip
for the republic below stairs without admitting that he did not know
his way round his wife’s house. He was about to knock on each door
in turn when he noticed that one in a corner at the end of the hall
was open and that it led into a narrow passageway. Beyond there was
light, possibly in one of those boudoirs of which he had heard. Mrs.
Murphy would have been sure to have a boudoir, and no doubt Ida, little
disposed as she was to indolence, spent some part of her mornings in it.

He adventured down the passageway that terminated in a large room
full of sunlight. He saw his wife standing in the middle of this room
looking about her with a curious expression of wistfulness. The little
hall was carpeted, but she heard him almost as soon as he saw her; she
would have known those light swift footsteps in a marching army. He was
inside the room before she could reach the doorway and close it behind
her and astonished to see a deep blush suffuse her face. His quick
darting glance took in his surroundings as he shook hands with her. The
room was a nursery.

“I had two beds put in here and have just seen that they were taken
out,” stammered Ida.

Her embarrassment was communicable, but he said gruffly as he walked to
the window, “Didn’t know the Murphys had children.”

“Oh, yes, they had two little ones. Seven in all. I think it odd they
should have left the toys here even if they are rich enough to buy toys
every day. There is something sacred about a child’s toys.”

Ida was merely talking against time, but she hardly could have said
anything better calculated to arrest his attention.

He turned and looked at her in astonishment.

“Do you mean to intimate--that you wish you had children? You?”

Ida’s brain as well as her body was very weary, but it sprang to action
at once. “Oh, yes,” she said intensely. “Oh, yes! And I might have had
two! They would be wonderful in this house.”

“But----” He cast about desperately. “With two children you could not
have gone to Europe.”

“That wouldn’t have mattered.”

“But--don’t you realise that it is this last year of unusual advantages
that has developed you so--so--remarkably? You hated children----”

“And do you suppose it was Europe that made me want children?”

“Oh, of course, nothing is as simple as that. You were taken out of
yourself, out of your narrow self-sufficient little life; all your fine
latent powers were developed----”

“But not altogether by Europe! Still, I don’t deny that it woke me up,
gave me not one new point of view but many, developed me, if you like
that better. Would you like lunch earlier? You get up at such unearthly
hours----”

“I’m not hungry. I want to talk to you. That is what I came for. Won’t
you sit down--no, not here! Let us go where there are comfortable
chairs. I--I am tired.”

“Very well. Let us go down to the library.” As she walked before him he
noted that her superb body, which usually looked as if set with fine
steel springs, was heavy and listless.

The masculine looking room below restored his balance.

“You don’t look as well as usual,” he remarked, as he threw himself
into the deepest of the chairs. “Yesterday was a hard day, and you had
had those men on your hands for----”

“I am tired,” said Ida briefly, “but it doesn’t matter. What do you
want to talk to me about?”

He did not answer for a few moments, then he stood up and thrust his
hands into his pockets and scowled at the carpet. Involuntarily Ida
also rose to her feet and braced herself, crossing her arms over her
breast.

“It is impossible for this to go on,” said Gregory rapidly. “It is
unnatural. People don’t submit to broken lives in these days. I think
you had better get a divorce and be happy. Mowbray seems to be a fine
fellow. Of course no one doubts that he has followed you here. He could
make you happy, and as soon as I am able--in a year or two--I shall
give you a million; in time more.”

“Oh! Oh!”

“You surely cannot want to live for ever like--like--this!”

“I have no desire to marry again. Have you?” She shot the question at
him, every nerve on edge with suspicion.

But the last thing in his mind was to betray Ora, and he answered
promptly. “No. But I am absorbed in my mine, and my life will be more
crowded every year with accumulating interests. You are a woman. You
are young--and--and--you wish for children.”

Ida believed that after her revelation of yesterday he had come to let
her down gently. She determined to throw her all on one heavy stake. If
she lost, at least she would have had the satisfaction of telling him
that she loved him; she had already sacrificed her pride, and there was
a reckless sweetness in the thought of revealing herself absolutely to
this man. When a woman loves a man not quite hopelessly she experiences
almost as much satisfaction in listening to her own confession as to
his.

She drew herself up, her arms still across her breast, and Gregory
thought he had never seen a woman look so dignified and so noble.

“Listen, Gregory,” she said, with no tremor in her voice but deepening
sadness in her eyes, “I regret that I have no children because they
would be yours. I am willing to live and die alone because I have
lost your love. I know how I lost it, but, as I look back over my
crudity and ignorance, I do not see how I could have kept it. You were
immeasurably above and beyond me. Nature, or some mental inheritance,
gave you sensitiveness, refinement, distinction, to say nothing of
brains. I had to achieve all that I am now. I was a raw conceited fool
like thousands of American girls of any class, who think they are
just a little too good for this world. I had ceased to love you in
my inordinate love of myself, and the natural consequence was, that
as I made no attempt to improve myself, I lost you as soon as my halo
of novelty had disappeared. I took for granted, however, that I was
returning from Europe to the old conditions. When I discovered that
you had no such intention I was piqued, astonished, angry. But when
I thought it all out I understood. You were within your rights, and
you have behaved with decency and self-respect. I have nothing but
unmitigated contempt for two people that continue to live together as
a mere matter of habit and convenience. They are the real immoralists
of the world, and the girls that ‘go wrong’ know it and laugh at the
reformers. Of course I never had ceased to love you down deep, but it
took just the course of conduct you pursued to make me known to myself.
I realise that it is hopeless--too late. I never intended to betray
myself, but I did so in an unguarded moment yesterday. Otherwise I
never should have told you all this. I have realised since then that
I have lost you irrevocably, but at least if I cannot be your wife I
will be no man’s, and I shall continue to bear your name--and see you
sometimes.”

Gregory, feeling as if he were being flayed, had dropped upon the edge
of a chair and buried his face in his hands. When she finished he said
hoarsely: “I never dreamed--I never imagined--I thought you incapable
of real feeling----”

“I think I was then. And since--Well, you are only a man, after all,
and I made you think what I chose until yesterday--Do you mean----” she
added sharply, “that you did not guess--did not _know_ yesterday?”

“It never occurred to me. I thought you merely were flirting a
little----”

“Hi!” cried Ida. Then she got back into her rôle. “It doesn’t matter,”
she said with sad triumph. “I am glad I have told you. As for the
future? You have convinced Butte that we are the best of friends. Stay
away if you wish unless I give an entertainment where your absence
would cause too much comment. You don’t want to marry again, but you
may feel yourself as free as air. And one day--when you are worn out,
tired of the everlasting struggle in which you moneymakers work harder
than the day labourer, with his eight-hour laws and freedom from the
terrific responsibilities of money; when you begin to break and want
a home, I will make one for you. There is the doorbell. Lord John is
coming for lunch. I shall give him his dismissal--once for all.”

Gregory stood up and took her hand. He had a vague masculine sense of
unfairness somewhere but he could not begin to define it, and he was as
deeply impressed as discouraged. “You are a grand woman, Ida,” he said.
“This is not an hour that any man forgets. I wish that you might be
happy.”

“Nature never intended that people on this planet should be happy--only
in spots, anyhow. And don’t worry about me. You have put me in the way
of getting a great deal out of this old game we call life, and I am
grateful to you. Good-bye.”

They shook hands and Gregory went out into the hall as the maid was
admitting Lord John. This time the men made no pretence at politeness.
They merely glared and passed.