XXXV


“Well,” said Ora, when she and Ida had returned to the hotel to dress
for dinner, “did you have a queer feeling when you were prowling
through those dim old rooms, furnished three or four hundred years ago,
and the scene of all sorts of romance and tragedy?”

“I had a queer feeling all right. Had visions of rheumatism, sciatica,
pneumonia, and a red nose for a week. I suppose those wonderful velvet
gowns they wore--in pictures, anyhow--were padded inside, and they
slept in them; didn’t take them off all winter. If I lived in one of
those palaces today I’d surely lose all my good American habits.”

“Didn’t you have any haunting sense of mystery--of having been there
before?”

“Nixie! No wonder I murdered if I ever was. However,” she added
thoughtfully, “there’s no telling what I might have felt if they’d had
a furnace in the house. There was something wonderful about it, all
right--being in those musty old rooms, that fairly smelt of the past. I
guess they’ll haunt me as some of those Roman palaces have that are not
shown to the public. But don’t put weird ideas into my head, Ora. They
don’t gee with Butte. The severely practical is my lay.”

“Don’t you think there could be romance and tragedy in Butte?”

“Oh, plenty of shooting, if you mean that; and mixing-up. But people
don’t stay jealous long enough to get real tragic about it; they just
get a divorce. We’ve improved on daggers and poisoned bowls and rings,
and the rest of it. Good old Butte!”

They all dined at the Bristol that night, and soon after nine o’clock
had the smoking-room to themselves. Ida, indeed, carried Mowbray off
into the reading-room. Ora sighed as she found herself alone with the
handsome distinguished Roman of the type that even in minor exponents
so often compelled her response. Why didn’t she love him? He was
proving himself the ideal companion. There was apparently no question
to which he had not given some thought, and he knew far more about the
subjects that appealed to her than she did herself. They discussed
the ever-fascinating sexual problems impersonally, delicately, and
exhaustively, a feat in itself, an experience Ora never had enjoyed
before; for while it drew them together it apparently neither disturbed
Valdobia nor altered his attitude toward her. His analyses of politics
and of the fashionable authors of the day were the acutest she had
heard or read, and he enlarged her knowledge of the world by his
anecdotes of life in the different capitals of Europe that he knew so
well. He could be personal without egotism, and his sense of humour was
keener than her own. While he treated her ideas and criticisms with
deference he forced her to look up to him and to feel only pleasure in
his masterful mind and great experience.

Tonight he made her talk about herself; and, artfully beating about her
life’s most significant chapter, she expressed herself with a freedom
and veracity which she found another novel and fascinating experience;
her confidences to Ida were superficial and sporadic. She could feel
his sympathy and understanding flow toward her, although he uttered
no sentimental platitudes, and let only his eyes express a little
of what he felt. But for the hour she glowed with a sense of utter
companionship, her mind was stimulated to the pitch of excitement; she
caught herself wishing that they could have these long intimate talks
for the rest of their lives, and that he would sometimes hold her hand
to complete the sense of perfect understanding.

When they parted at midnight and she walked slowly up the stairs
alone--Ida had dismissed Mowbray an hour since--she sighed again.
Why didn’t she feel the pull? What was the nature of that mysterious
current that seemed to vibrate between two people only out of the
world’s billions, and was quite independent of mental identities?
Certainly passion was not the only source. If she had been free and
never had met Gregory Compton she would have married Valdobia and given
him all he craved; for his magnetism was by no means confined to his
brain. Why could not she love him as it was? She had not been the
heroine of one of those passionate love affairs that leave a woman
cold for several years, perhaps for ever. The intensity of emotion she
had experienced during these months in Europe had been one-sided, a
mere madness of the imagination. She had yet to realise that a woman
can live more profoundly and completely with a man in her imagination
than when in daily contact with his discouraging weaknesses, his
inability to reach her impossible standard, and impinged upon by the
disintegrating forces of daily life.

Such women as Ora Blake, endowed with a certain measure of creative
imagination, yet spending their maturing years unnaturalised citizens
in a cross-section of life which barely brushes their aloofness in
passing, develop as unnormally as those that cultivate this exotic
garden of the mind for fame and fortune. If they find a mate while the
imagination is still as young as their years, these highly organised
women, with every sense and faculty keenly alert, and stimulated by
mental contact as others may be by drugs and wine, have the opportunity
at least to be the happiest beings on earth. If they marry a brute,
or are forced to fight the world for bread, a wide channel is dug in
the brain through which flow the normal and crowding thoughts of the
average, commonplace, adaptable woman; which is perhaps the best of all
educations for life.

But Ora had married a kind prosaic man who soon learned to let her
alone, and kept her in a comfort that burdened her days with leisure.
If she had been unimaginative no harm would have been done. She either
would have grown fond of her essential husband and become a domestic
angel, or consoled herself with society and bridge. But, misplaced in
life, she belonged to the intellectual aristocracy of the earth, who
are the loneliest of its inhabitants, unless they can establish an
invisible bond with their fellow-beings by offerings from that mental
garden which is at once their curse and their compensation for the
doubtful gift of life.

Ora was too indifferent to the world to care to weave this gossamer
bridge, and had grown accustomed to mental solitude. But she had
never placed any curb on her imagination. In the days when her only
solace was books it enabled her to visualise the _mise-en-scène_ of
the remote or immediate past, the procession of the traveller, or the
abstractions of science; as if she were in one of those theatres
where the great modern manager threatens to atrophy what imagination
is left in the world. It even enabled her to enjoy fiction whose scene
was a land of which she had no personal knowledge; a rare gift in the
American, whose demand for familiar settings and characters keeps our
literature commonplace. And she could at will shut her eyes and wander
in Europe when Butte became insufferable.

Her surrender to the obsession of Gregory Compton had been gradual;
she had fought it, not only out of loyalty to her husband and her
friend, but because the future menaced terrors against which she had no
desire to pit her strength. But she had finally cast defiance to the
future, and dismissed her phantom loyalty with a shrug. Mark no doubt
had consoled himself for her defection long since; to Ida a husband
was a money-maker pure and simple. She herself would never see Gregory
Compton again if she could avoid it; or, if life took her inevitably
back to Butte, no doubt her infatuation would have been cured by mental
satiety, and she would be able to greet him with the indifference that
is ever the portion of the discarded lover.

Having arrived at this reasonable conclusion, she had dismissed
cynicism, cowardice, and qualms, to limbo, and entered upon one of
those exalting, tormenting, incredibly sweet, and profoundly depressing
mental love affairs, which, lacking the element of comedy inevitable in
all actual relations between men and women, obsess the mind and detach
it from life.

After she parted from Valdobia, puzzled and wistful, she recalled one
week during which she had been completely happy. Ida was visiting
friends uncongenial to herself, and she had gone alone to Bruges. In
that ancient city of almost perfect beauty, she had given the wildness
in her nature uninterrupted liberty. She had written letters that no
woman yet has sent to a man without regretting it, for in this stage
of man’s progress, at least, he wants little of the soul of woman. It
is possible that the women who live in their imaginations are the most
fortunate, after all, for they arbitrarily make man the perfect mate
he possibly may be some centuries hence. At all events Ora imagined
Gregory Compton with her unremittingly, deliberately ignoring the
depression that must descend upon her when once more companioned by his
wife. It had seemed to her that her step had never been so buoyant,
her body so light. People had paused to stare at the beautiful young
American with her head in the air looking as if she were about to
sing. It had been a wonderful, an almost incredible experience, and
she never had been able quite to recapture it even when alone in the
night. But she had wondered sometimes if life held any happiness as
real as that had been, and she wondered again as she switched off her
light and flung herself into the bed that had witnessed so much despair
before Valdobia had appeared and put a quietus on her imagination.
She wondered also if the passion of the soul were so much greater
than the common experience of man and woman that its indulgence must
forever make life itself unreal. She felt that this question threw some
light on her problem, then dismissed the subject peremptorily. She
might regret that extraordinary love affair, with its terrors and its
delights, but she would bury it once for all; and she fell asleep with
the wise remark:

“What fools we are! Oh, lord, what fools!”