IV


It was on the morning of this same day that Gregory sat alone in his
cabin uncommonly idle, for he still spent the greater part of his
time underground, when not away on business connected with his new
investments and deals. For the last week he had not left the hill, and
although he was on the alert to hear his geological acumen vindicated,
he was in no mood to find pleasure in his mine. His conscience, an
organ that troubled him little, was restive. In spite of his liberal
disbursements, he knew that he had treated Ida unfairly. He had long
since made up his mind to obliterate her from his personal life, and,
if the truth must be told about a man who had snapped his fingers in
the face of the most formidable combination of capital in the world,
he was afraid to meet his wife. Vanity, he argued, in such women takes
the place of warmth, and he had no mind to burden his memory and
resource with an endless chain of subterfuges; nor had he any relish
for the bald statement that since he could not have the woman he wanted
he would have none; and that his mine, as complex and mysterious,
as provocative of dreams, as capricious and satisfying as woman
herself--to say nothing of hard work and increasing power--was to fill
his life.

Ida might rage, stamp, scream, with her hands on her hips, her superb
eyes flashing. Worse still, she might weep, lamenting that he loved her
no longer--if he made her hurried friendly calls. Far, far worse, he
might succumb to her beauty and superlative femaleness and hate himself
ever after. His was to be a life of unremitting and constructive work;
he must keep that blue flame burning on the altar in his sanctuary. If
he never paused to draw it up into his consciousness he must know it
was there.

Better stay away until she understood all that it was necessary
she should know, wore out her pique in private, and accepted the
situation. But he would have felt better this morning if he had heard
that her train had arrived early in the evening. He might be ruthless,
even where women were concerned, but he was also sensitive and capable
of tenderness.

But he was not thinking of Ida alone. He was listening for the
footsteps of Joshua Mann, and in a few moments he heard them, as
well as the angry growl of his foreman’s voice. Mann entered without
ceremony.

“I’ve been looking for you, sir. We’ve the devil’s own luck again----”

“Apex struck the Primo vein?”

“No, and won’t for fifty feet yet. But--well--I hate to say it--we’ve
lost our vein--cut off as short as if it had been sawed. Of course,
it’s faulted, and God only knows where its dropped to--or how far.
A prettier shoot of ore was never uncovered. What’s worrying me is
that--oh, hell!--just suppose that’s what Amalgamated is sinking on. My
head’s going round. Can I have something?”

Gregory waved his hand toward the cupboard where his visitors found
refreshment. When Mann had braced himself, his employer tapped a large
sheet of paper that lay on the table.

“Come here,” he said. “I made this map some time ago, and calculated
to a day when you would lose the vein. I guessed our vein had faulted
before Amalgamated got busy. But don’t worry. They’re either on a
parallel vein or on a mere fork.” His pencil moved along the vein
already stoped, travelled over the fault line and recovered a vein
further down. “Hundred feet,” he said. “With air drills and unless the
fault breccia is uncommonly hard, which I don’t think is the case, we
should find it in less than three weeks. They can’t get through that
rock for at least a month. Even then they may not touch us, but then
again they may, and we must be there first. Cut across the fault at
once and follow it on the footwall side to the east. Get well into the
footwall. If you don’t recover the vein inside of a hundred feet I’ll
stand to lose a thousand dollars and you’ll be the winner.”

“I guess not,” said Mann admiringly. “But, by jing! I was worried. You
never can tell about them faults. When the old earth split herself up
and got to slipping she not only lost one side of herself sometimes,
but twisted about as if she was having fun with the apex law of Montana
in advance. But I figure out that you’re like old Marcus Daly--you’ve
got a sort of X-ray in your eye that sees the ore winking below. So
long.”

He departed to carry encouragement to the anxious miners, and Gregory
went out and walked along his hill. By this time he knew every inch
of it, and had found indications of ore in his other claims while
superintending the development work necessary before perfecting his
patents. If Amalgamated sank on his present vein and the courts
enjoined him from working it until the matter of apex rights was
settled, he would simply go ahead and sink through the carbonates in
his other claims to those vast deposits of chalcopyrite with which he
was convinced his hill was packed. He knew the geological history of
every mine in Montana, and while he had given up all hope of finding
gold on his estate save in small incidental values, he believed that he
possessed one of the greatest copper deposits in the Rocky Mountains.
And now that even one vein of his hill was threatened, he dismissed his
old dreams with a shrug and transferred his undivided affection to the
exciting treasure the earth had given him. There were few surprises
in gold mines. A great copper mine might make geological history. In
two districts, Butte and Castle Mountain, copper glance, an ore of
secondary enrichment, had been found far down in the sulphide zone
below chalcopyrite, chief of the primary ores. He believed that he
should find glance at depth of nine hundred feet. If there were masses
of it he should take out millions in a year, for chalcopyrite was the
richest of the permanent copper ores of this region, running as high as
79.8.

He had been on amiable terms with the manager and engineer of the Apex
Mine since the battle underground, and he crossed the claim unmolested
to make his daily inspection of the Primo shaft house. But there had
been no further attempt to use the cross-cut, although the Apex people
had managed before they were discovered to drive to the point upon
which they expected to sink.

Gregory walked up the hill beyond to look at the cottage just
completed, which was to be occupied by the manager and foreman of the
Primo Mine as soon as Mark reopened it. He had been about to begin
operations, cutting across the fault Gregory had demonstrated--a fault
parallel to the one in Perch of the Devil--when he was shot nearly to
death.

The cottage was situated in a clearing in the pine woods, somewhat
apart from the cabins, which were being renovated and made comfortable
for the miners. Gregory was so positive that the pyroxenite vein would
be recovered just beyond the row of aspens, some sixty feet below
the tableland, that Mark, who believed his friend to be an inspired
geologist, was preparing for a long period of mining; although if
it had been a quartz mine Gregory, sure as he was of his judgment,
would not have permitted him to put up a mill and concentrating plant
until sufficient ore had been blocked out to warrant the expense. But
pyroxenite went direct to the smelter, and a cottage could always be
rented.

The little bungalow had two bedrooms besides one for a Chinese servant,
a bathroom, and a large living-room with a deep fireplace, a raftered
ceiling, and pine walls stained brown. Gregory, as he realised how
cosy it would be when furnished, wondered that he had been satisfied
with his two-roomed cabin for so long. He had been too absorbed to
think of comfort, but today he felt a desire for something more
nearly resembling a home than a perch. He looked through the windows
at the sibilant pines, the pink carpet of primrose moss, the distant
forests rising to the blue and white mountains; and then he sighed as
he glanced slowly about the long room and pictured it furnished in
warm tones of red and brown, wondering if either of the men would be
married. It would be an ideal home for a honeymoon.

He twitched his shoulders impatiently and went outside. To his surprise
he saw a wagon ascending the hill laden with lumber, the seats occupied
by the contractor and carpenters that had built the bungalow.

“What’s up?” he asked, as the contractor leaped to the ground.

“Another bungalow. Perhaps you could suggest a site. It’s to be near
this, and the same size. We had a telegram from Mr. Blake yesterday.”

“But what does he want of two cottages?”

“Can’t say, sir, unless he means to come out here to get well.”

“That’s nonsense. He knows he could stay at my house on the ranch.”

But Gregory was not in the habit of thinking aloud. After indicating
a site he swung back to his hill, angry and apprehensive. Could it
be possible that Mark intended to spend the summer at the mine and
bring his wife with him? As soon as he reached his cabin he sat down
at his table, and after getting his friend’s present address from
Luning, telephoned a long distance message to Pony to be telegraphed
to Mr. Mark Blake in Santa Barbara. Its gist was that the weather was
abominable and that Mark must not think of anything so foolish as to
bring his weakened heart and lungs to this altitude. His services
would be imperative later when his solicitous friend locked horns with
Amalgamated, and meanwhile he was, for heaven’s sake, to take care of
himself and remain on the coast until he was in a condition to work day
and night.

He received an answer that afternoon.

“No intention of leaving here for two months. Lungs pretty good, but
shall wait for leg to heal. Ora wants present cottage for herself as
she intends to spend summer at mine. Will you be on the lookout for a
manager? He can live in the lessee’s shack until the new cottage is
built. Might begin operations at once. Hope this not too much trouble.
Mark.”

This message was transmitted over the telephone, and, to the excessive
annoyance of the operator, who happened to be the belle of Pony,
Gregory asked her three times, and with no excess of politeness, to
repeat it. The third time he wrote it out and stared at the words as if
the unsteady characters were recombining into a sketch of the infernal
regions.

“Good God!” he thought. “And I can’t get away!”

Was Mark mad? Was she mad? Then he realised the blissful ignorance of
both regarding the drama he so often had swept from the stage of his
mind, that secret dweller in the most secret recesses of his soul.
Doubtless Ora never had thrown him a thought since they parted at her
gate. He remembered her expressed intention to live at her mine when
the lease was up, her desire to adventure underground, her intense
appreciation of the romance of mining. He closed his eyes, his face
relaxed. So long as she cared nothing for him there was no danger; he
might daydream about her a bit. At least--at last!--he should see her
again, talk to her, work with her, help her as no one else could help
her. If the association he would have avoided was inevitable why not
welcome it as a brief oasis in what must be an arid life, so far as
mortal companionship was concerned?

But he was not the man to dream long. Presently he opened his eyes,
set his jaw until it looked a yard long, put on his overalls, and went
underground.