XXIII


“Well, what do you know about that?”

Mark’s feet were on the table in the cabin Gregory had had built for
himself on the top of the hill. The news had just been brought to them
by one of the men who had a faithful friend in the Primo Mine.

Gregory was engaged in biting a cigar to pieces. He waited some ten
minutes before replying, during which Mark smoked philosophically.
“I think this,” he said finally, “what those fellows are after
is gold, not copper. Better suggest to them to get out an expert
geologist--Holmes is a good friend of mine--who will tell them to sink
a shaft over on the right, or run a drift from the original stope. All
we need is time.”

“I’m on. But will they do it? They’re not fools and what they’re after
mainly is cash.”

“I think they’ll listen to reason. They’re not far from the boundary
line and there’s no possible doubt that the vein apexes here. The
moment they cross the line I’ll get out an injunction. That would stop
them anyhow, hold them up until their lease had expired. And their
chance is good to recover the vein on the other side. No doubt it has
faulted. Have you noticed those aspens about a hundred yards beyond
their shaft? Where there are aspens there is water. Now as there is no
water in sight it must be below the surface, and that would indicate
faulting. There might be no ore on the other side, but the chance is
worth taking. Better have a talk with Osborne tomorrow. He’s the least
mulish of the two.”

“Good. I might offer them some inducement--give them an extra month or
two. Even so we’d win out. But they’re not the only danger ahead. How
long since you’ve been in Butte?”

“Not since I began work.”

“Well, let me tell you that Amalgamated is buzzing. They’ve got on to
the fact good and plenty that you’ve got the biggest thing in copper
that has been struck in Montana for twenty years. Of course they get
figures regularly from the sampling works. They know you’ve already
taken out half a million dollars worth of ore--net--and that the new
shoot is getting richer every minute. They’re talking loud about
spoiling the market and all the rest of it. Of course that’s rank
nonsense. What worries them is a rival in Montana. If your mine was in
Colorado or Michigan they wouldn’t care shucks. You haven’t taken out
enough yet to worry them about the market. But if they can queer your
game they’ll do it. Lucky for you the smelting works need copper just
now as badly as you need them. If it were not for that strike in the
Stemwinder and the Corkscrew you might be having trouble.”

Gregory smiled, but as he set his jaw at the same time it was not an
agreeable smile. “I’m in a mood to fight somebody--and win. I wanted
gold and didn’t get it. A row with Amalgamated would relieve my
feelings--although I’d rather use my fists.”

“They’re mad, too, because you’ve named your mine ‘Perch of the Devil.’
That’s the old name for Butte, and they look upon it as a direct
challenge.”

“So it is. And you don’t suppose I’d call my mine Limestone Hill, do
you? I shouldn’t get half the fun out of it. What the devil can they
do, anyhow?”

“That’s what I’m worrying about. You never know what Amalgamated has
up its sleeve. There was just one man who was too much for them--for
a while--and that was Heinze. And they got him in the end. I believe
you’d give them a run for their money, and I don’t rank you second to
Heinze or any other man when it comes to brains or resource. But--well,
they’ve got billions--and the best legal talent in the state.”

“You deserve a return compliment. You may consider yourself counsel for
Perch of the Devil Mine.”

“Jimminy! But I’d like a chance at them.” Mark’s cigar was burning his
fingers but he only felt the fire in his brain. “Do you mean it?”

“Who else? Watch them. Put spies on them. Fight them with their own
weapons. They’ve spies among my miners. That doesn’t worry me a bit.
I merely mention it. Let’s change the subject. I’ve got to sleep
tonight. What’s the news from Europe?”

“I’ve got Ora’s last letter here; want to hear it?”

“Good Lord, no. Tell me what they are doing. I sent Ida five thousand
dollars a few days ago, so I suppose they’re flying high. She cabled
her thanks and said they were both well.”

“Don’t you really know what they’ve been doing?”

“Not a thing.”

“Well--let’s see. They went over in June. They did France, Germany--lot
of places in regulation tourist style--incidentally met several of
Mrs. Stratton’s old friends. Then they went back to Paris, where they
appear to have indulged in an orgy of clothes preparatory to a round of
country house visits on the Continent and in England. Ora writes with
great enthusiasm of--er--Ida’s improvement. Says you’d think she’d been
on top all her life, especially since she got those Paris duds, and met
a lot of smart people; makes a hit with everybody, and will astonish
Butte when she comes back.”

“That will please her!” He felt no glow of tenderness, but some
satisfaction that he could gratify the ambitions of the woman he had
married. He was still too keen on his own youthful dreams, and thankful
at their partial fulfillment, not to sympathise with those of others.

Mark left him to accept the more commodious hospitality of Oakley, and
Gregory sat for another hour smoking, hoping for the mood of sleep. But
the news had excited him, and he preferred to sit up rather than to
toss about his narrow bed. The last part of the conversation, however,
had given a new turn to his thoughts. Suddenly, unbidden, Ora flashed
into his mind and refused to be dislodged. He walked up and down,
striving to banish her as he had done before, when, sleepless, she had
peremptorily demanded his attention. Tonight she was almost a visible
presence in the little room.

He sat down again and grimly permitted his mind to dwell upon his long
communion with her on the steps of the School of Mines. He tried to
analyse his impulse to take her there. Unconventional as he was it had
never occurred to him to do such a thing before, and there were twenty
women in the room whom he would have expected to exercise a more potent
fascination had he been in the humour for a flirtation. He had been
quite honest in telling Ora that he had taken her out merely to look at
her under the stars, and in intimating that to make love to her was the
last thing in his mind. She had hardly seemed a woman at all there in
the ballroom or when he first sat at her feet; his mind was relaxed and
the “queer” romantic or poetical streak that he often deprecated had
taken possession of it; if he had had a suspicion of anything more he
would have fled from her at once, for she was the wife of his friend.
As it was he merely had dismissed Mark from his mind and tried the
experiment of setting a bit of exquisite white poetry to the music of
the stars....

As often as her memory had assailed him he had longed to rehearse that
scene; the conversation, desultory and personal; her white profile
against the flaming blue sky; the intensity and brilliancy of her eyes,
so unlooked for in her young almost colorless face; her pink mouth
that changed its expression so often; her curious magnetism, so unlike
that of the full-blooded woman--all of that and something more; the
strange community of mind--or soul?--that had drawn him on to pour
out his secret self into another self of whose contact he was almost
literally sensible,--in a sudden desire for comprehension that had been
like the birth of a new star in his mental constellation. He had felt
the thrill of her sympathy, her understanding, then another thrill of
perplexity, fear; then the little quarrel, when he had thought her more
adorable than ever, and no longer bearing the least resemblance to a
star-wraith, but wholly feminine. When he left her it was with the
confused sense that he had sojourned for a bit with the quintessence of
womanhood whom Nature had cast in a new and perilous mould.

He went over the hour again and again, hoping to bore himself, to
arrive at the conclusion that it had been a mere commonplace flirtation
with a coquette who was as cold as she looked. But he found the
recaptured scene very sweet. The power of concentration he possessed
enabled him to shut out the little room and sit at the feet of the
woman whose magic personality had penetrated the barriers he so
jealously had built about his soul and given him the first sense of
companionship he had ever known.

He was filled with a longing that shook him and hurt him, to feel that
sense of sympathetic companionship, of spiritual contact, again. And
far more. He knew that she had loved no man, that all the glory and
the riches within her were waiting--and if she had waited, and he had
waited, and they had met unfettered that night----

He sprang to his feet. His face in the smoky light looked black.

“God!” he muttered. “God! Have I fallen as low as that? If ever I think
of her again I’ll cut my heart out. I hope to God the Amalgamated puts
up the hell of a fight. What I want is a man’s work in the world, not a
play actor’s.”