XXXVI


After this she discarded what was left of her crust, and emerged like
a butterfly. The present was delightful, she would enjoy it without
analysis or retrospect. She met several clever and interesting men,
but had eyes for no one but Valdobia. They explored Genoa until they
knew it almost as well as the natives, spending hours down in the long
twisted streets, so narrow that no vehicle had ever visited them, and
swarming like the inside of an anthill. Harrowing adventures were
impossible, for the Genoese masses if discourteous are neither a
lawless nor an impertinent race. Ora and Ida might have roamed alone,
and been unmolested save by the enterprising shopkeepers that dealt in
filigree. They rode over the steep hills in the trams, and took long
motor drives in the brilliant winter sunshine to the picturesque towns
and villages down the Riviera. Then, on a Saturday morning, they bade
good-bye to the ancient city and took the train for Monte Carlo.

The girls established themselves in a small hotel opposite the Casino
Gardens, the men in the great hotel that lies between the Casino and
the International Sporting Club.

“I suppose we really should have sent for Lady Gower,” said Ora,
doubtfully, as they hooked each other up for dinner. “It’s stretching
the point rather to come to a place like Monte Carlo with two men.
We’ll be sure to run into a dozen people we know.”

“Oh, bother! I love the idea of feeling real devilish for once.
Besides, anything goes at Monte Carlo, and everybody is interested in
gambling and nothing else. What good would old Norfolk-Howard do us,
anyhow, asleep on a sofa. She never could keep awake after ten, and
nobody’d know in those big rooms whether she was there or not. We’re
Americans, anyhow, and I’m having the time of my life. Lord John is a
perfect dear.”

“Well, at least I am thankful that you are no longer in a hurry to
return to Butte.”

“Butte’ll keep, I guess. The more experiences I take back the
more they’ll think of me. Gives me backbone to feel a real
woman-of-the-world. Besides, kid, it’s good philosophy to drink the
passing moment dry. Amalgamated may bust us any minute. You look
prettier every day, and I’m not going off either.”

She wore a severely cut gown of black velvet, the corsage draped with
coral-coloured chiffon. Her first evening gowns, cut by the ruthless
Parisian, had caused her many qualms but they had been growing more
_décolleté_ ever since; and so superb were her neck and shoulders that
she had ceased to regret her lack of jewels. Ora had refrained from
buying any, although she longed for sapphires; but she always wore her
pearls. Tonight her gown was of a misty pale green material from which
she rose like a lily from its calyx. She still wore her hair massed
softly on the top of her head, and although not as tall as Ida, and far
from being as fully developed, was an equally arresting figure. No two
women were ever more excellent foils, and that may have been one secret
of their amicable relations.

They dined with their cavaliers at one of the fashionable restaurants,
then, after an hour in the Casino rooms, which were not at all to their
taste, with their ornate walls and dingy crowd, went by means of lifts
and underground corridors over to the International Sporting Club.
Valdobia and Mowbray had put them up at this exclusive resort during
the afternoon and they entered the roulette rooms at once. Here the
walls were chastely hung with pale grey satin, and all the colour was
in the company. The long tables were crowded with smart-looking men
and women of both worlds, although only the ladies that had stepped
down from ancestral halls dared to show a grey hair or a wrinkle. The
cocottes were so young and fresh as well as beautiful that to Ora and
Ida they looked much like girls of their own class. All, young and old,
were splendidly dressed and bejewelled; and if there was excitement
in their brains there was no evidence of it in their calm or animated
faces. They might have been a great house-party amusing themselves with
some new and innocuous game.

Our party walked about for a time dividing their attention between the
spinning balls, the faces of the players, and the gowns of the women;
even those of the cocottes were not eccentric, although worn with a
certain inimitable style. Their ropes of pearls were also the longest
in the room. A number of the most notable men in Europe were present,
princes of reigning houses, and statesmen high in the service of their
country.

In spite of the absence of that feverish excitement which is supposed
to pervade these gambling rooms of Monte Carlo (and which is absent
from the Casino even when a man shoots himself and is whisked out), Ora
wandered about in a curious state of exaltation. The cool splendour
of the rooms, the atmosphere of high breeding and restraint, the
gratification of the æsthetic sense at every turn, the beauty of
the women and the distinguished appearance of the men made it a
romantic and memorable scene. Notwithstanding the constant clink of
gold, the monotonous admonitions of the croupiers, it was a sort of
worldly fairyland, this apotheosis of one of the most perilous of
human indulgences. These people might be gambling for greed or mere
excitement, being blasé of other mundane diversions, but they were at
the same time so frank and so reserved, so pleased and so indifferent,
that they produced the illusion of sojourning on a plane high above the
common mortal with his commonplace loves and disasters and struggles
to exist or shine. No wonder that men came here to forget the burdens
of state, women Society’s conservatisms or the inconstancy of man. For
the hour, and the hour generally lasted until four in the morning, they
lived in a world apart, and a duchess sat next to a cocotte with a
serene indifference that amounted almost to democracy.

“I don’t know that romantic is the word I should use,” said Valdobia,
laughing; Ora had uttered some of her thoughts aloud; “but I think I
know what you mean. The people that come here can afford to lose; their
minds are almost as carefully composed as their costumes; they are both
pleasantly reckless and frivolous; this is their real play-time; the
world beyond these four walls is obliterated; if they lose they shrug
their shoulders, and if they win they experience something like a real
thrill; in short, being soaked in worldliness, it is their only chance
to feel primitive--for gambling was practised by the most ancient
tribes of which we have any knowledge. At the Casino most of those
people are subconsciously wondering how they are going to pay their
hotel bills and get out of Monte Carlo, calm as they manage to look;
but here--well, here you see the quintessence of the world’s frivolity.
No wonder it creates a heady atmosphere. Do you want to gamble?”

“Of course I do.”

“Well, put a louis on the red. I’ll follow your stakes. Perhaps we’ll
bring each other luck.”

They staked and won, staked and won again, seven times running without
removing their winnings from the red. Then Valdobia said, “Don’t tempt
fortune too far. The luck may turn to the green any moment. Suppose we
try ours _en plein_.” He selected the number 39, and once more they
won. Ora, her hands full of gold, turned to him with blazing eyes. Her
cheeks were crimson. Valdobia laughed.

“You mustn’t look so happy,” he said teasingly, “or these old stagers
will know that you are what your friend calls a hayseed. Better change
all this gold into notes.”

“Notes? I want my gold. Paper never did mean anything to me.”

“What a child you are--ah! I must leave you for a moment. The Duc----”
he mentioned a prince of his royal house--“wishes to speak to me. Don’t
try _en plein_ again. That rarely happens twice. Put a louis at a time
on the red.”

He left her. Ora deliberately placed not only her double handful of
gold on the red, but pushed forward the pile that had accumulated
before her. Red came up and doubled her winnings. She added to her
already imposing hillock the gold shoved toward her, and, with a quick
glance at Valdobia, who was deep in conversation with his prince, took
a thousand franc note from her châtelaine bag and laid it on top of
the gold. Once more she won, and met the sympathetic smiles of the
croupiers, who in the Sporting Club, at least, are very human persons.
She was about to add another thousand franc note, when Valdobia
returned. He swept her gold and notes off the red just as _rien ne va
plus_ sounded above the buzz of conversation behind the tables.

“What on earth are you doing?” he asked angrily. “I don’t like to see a
woman gamble like that.”

Ora pouted and looked like a naughty child.

“But I want to gamble. Give me my money. What have you to say about it?”

“I brought you here--and I shall not bring you again if you are going
to gamble like that old Frankfurt banker over there. Why not follow the
example of Mrs. Compton, who is decorously putting five franc pieces on
the green at the next table?”

“Oh, Ida! I like the sensation of doing big things. You just said we
enjoyed letting loose our primitive instincts.”

“Is that the way you felt? Well, here are three louis. Stake one at a
time. I shall change the rest into notes and give them to you at the
hotel.”

He kept his eye on her, and she staked her gold pieces one after
another and lost.

“Now,” he said, “come into the bar and have a glass of wine or a lemon
squash. I want to talk to you.”

They found seats in a corner of the bar behind a little table, and
Ora demurely ordered a lemonade. “I suppose you are going to scold
me,” she murmured, although her cheeks were still flushed and her eyes
rebellious. “What difference did it make? I am not poor, and I had won
nearly all that I risked, anyhow. You have seen women gamble all your
life. One would think that you were a hayseed, yourself.”

“Shall I be quite honest? I fancy I was jealous. For the first time I
saw you completely carried away. I had hoped to furnish that impulse
myself!”

“It is a wonderful sensation,” she said provokingly. “I doubt if
anything but gambling could inspire it.”

“Do you?” But he knew that it was no time for sentiment, and asked
curiously, “Are you so fond of gold? I never saw such a greedy little
thing.”

“Remember I’ve walked round over gold for the best part of my life, and
have a mine of my own. It fascinates me, but not because I care much
about riches--I like the liberty that plenty of money gives; that, to
my mind, is all that wealth means. But I loved the feeling of being
possessed, of being absolutely reckless. I should have liked to know
that my whole fortune depended upon that spinning ball. That would
have been worth while! It makes one forget everything--everything!”

He looked at her with half-closed eyes. “You have a secret chapter in
your life,” he said. “Some day I shall read it. But I can’t make up my
mind whether you are a born gambler or not.”

Ora shrugged her shoulders. “To tell you the truth I shouldn’t care if
I never saw a gambling table again. I have had the sensation. That is
enough. I will admit I was rather disappointed not to lose that immense
stake. Lucky at cards, you know.”

“And you think you are unlucky in love?” Valdobia laughed, but his face
was still grim. “How many men have you had in love with you already?”

“That doesn’t count!”

He turned pale. “What do you mean by that?”

“I mean that I don’t believe I am destined to happiness. Don’t you
think we know our lines instinctively?”

“I know that you are trying to torment me. You are still excited and
angry, so I shall not permit your words, significant as they are, to
keep me awake tonight.” He was smiling again, but she saw the anger in
his own eyes, and said impulsively:

“I rather like you better than usual tonight. You have made me do
something I didn’t want to do, and anger is becoming to you.”

“The eternal female! Well, God knows, I wouldn’t have you abnormal.
What is this?”

A page was standing before the table with a telegram in his hand. “Pour
M. le Marquis de Valdobia,” he said.

With a word of apology Valdobia opened the telegram. Ora, watching him,
saw his face turn white.

“What is it?” she asked anxiously. “I do hope it is not bad news.” She
felt a sharp pang at the possibility of losing him.

He rose and looked at his watch. “My mother is very ill,” he said. “A
train goes in an hour and ten minutes. I must take it. But there is
something I want to say to you before I go; I may be detained in Rome.
Will you get your wrap and come into the gardens for a few moments?”

“I am so sorry,” murmured Ora, with real sympathy. “Of course I will
go.”

He took her to the cloak-room. “Wait here for a moment,” he said. “I
must telephone to my man to pack and meet me at the train; and tell
Mowbray not to look for us later.”

He left her, and Ora watched the passing couples, trying not to think.
She was a little frightened, but still too excited to shrink from a
possible ordeal.