V


Butte long since had made up its mind as to the social future of
Mrs. Gregory Compton. That Ida’s mother had been a laundress and her
father a miner concerned the ladies of Butte as little as many similar
outcroppings of family history peculiar not only to Montana but to all
regions of recent exploitation and rapid growth.

In the hearty welcome extended to the newcomer, with either the
money or the personality to command its attention, Butte more nearly
resembles London than any other city in the world. To pasts she is
indifferent, provided they are not resurrected as models for a present:
she asks no questions of a pretty, amiable, amusing woman who pays
her the compliment of sojourning in her midst, so long as the lady
exercises an equal reticence--assuming reticence to be her virtue--and
plays the social game with _savoir faire_. Distractions on that high
perch are few, social life ebbs oftener than it flows, many of the
large houses are closed for the greater part of the year, and only the
very young, who care not where they are so long as they may dance, find
life in an overgrown mining camp as satisfactory as their elders find
New York.

But the hospitality of Butte is genuine and founded largely upon common
sense. Most of the women composing its society have enjoyed wealth for
many years: they have travelled extensively; and if they continue to
make their homes in Butte it is solely on account of their own business
interests or those of their men. They argue that to deprive themselves
of even the casual diversion, assuming the exclusive airs of large
and resourceful communities, would merely put them on a level with
thousands of other small towns slowly stagnating, be unworthy of their
worldly experience, and of the large free spirit of the Northwest which
has pervaded that isolated camp since they came with their husbands or
fathers to take a hand in its history.

As for Mrs. Gregory Compton all they knew of her in her present
stage of development was favourable, although several had a lively
remembrance of the rosy black-haired Ida Hook delivering her excellent
mother’s laundry work at their back door, and receiving more or less
of her “cheek.” But they had heard, at the time, of her lessons with
Professor Whalen, and of Ora Blake’s coincident interest. Of her social
advantages and triumphs in Europe the press had kept them informed; she
returned to Butte, in fact, as one new-born. Moreover, she now owned
one of the finest houses in the city for entertaining, they knew that
she had elected to shine in Butte rather than in London (that Mecca of
so many quick-rich women without position in their own country); and
above all she was the wife of Gregory Compton, the man in whom Montana
was beginning to feel assured it could take an unequivocal pride, not
only for his diabolical cleverness, but because he was as “straight”
as the Twentieth Century in the United States of America would permit.
Butte felt devoutly grateful to Ida for being and returning, and, with
that utter lack of affectation that characterised it, began calling two
days after her arrival.

Ida would have been glad to have had Ora’s support and advice during
this ordeal--which caused her far more apprehension than ducal
week-ends. But she summoned all her acquired knowledge and tact,
fortified it with her native and supreme confidence in herself, and
made no mistakes. Butte was charmed with the severe rich gowns that set
off her haughty head and warmly colored face and the long, flowing,
yet stately lines of her beautiful figure; charmed also with a manner
that was both simple and dignified. She showed no enthusiasm at being
taken up so promptly, neither did she quite accept it as a matter of
course. If her talk ranged freely over common acquaintance in London,
the Paris dressmakers of the season, the new opera, the plays of the
moment in New York, it was without glibness, and she took a firm hold
on the older and more important women of the community by confiding to
them that she should not make her first venture in the difficult art of
entertaining until her friend Mrs. Blake returned to help her through
the novitiate. Many of the younger women were the wives of Amalgamated
officials and attorneys, or of men in a relationship to that mighty
power but one degree further removed; but the men individually were too
broad-minded to cherish a personal grudge against Compton, and they
were, moreover, quite as eager as their mates to meet his handsome wife.

During the ensuing fortnight Ida dined out every night, went to a
bridge party every afternoon, as well as to several luncheons, teas,
and dances. She wore a different costume every time she appeared in
public; but although there was at the moment nothing in Butte to
compare with her gowns she never produced the effect of outshining the
other women by anything but her beauty and individual style. In short
her success was so immediate and so final that, although she liked
these ladies of her native town even better than she had anticipated,
her rapid conquest soon lost its novelty, and she wished that Ora would
return; not only because she missed her increasingly, but because to
entertain in her great house would give her a new and really poignant
excitement, and lift her definitely from the ranks of the merely
received.

Gregory telephoned every few days, and never twice at the same hour.
When she found herself restlessly awaiting the ring of the instrument,
she dashed out of the house angrily and took a walk. If she found upon
her return that he had called her up, she felt that he had given her
the excuse to telephone to him, and she soon learned at what hours she
could find him either in his cabin or down in the mine, where he had
a booth. She was furious at what she called her raging female vanity,
and if she could have found another man to assuage it she would not
have hesitated to press him into service at whatever cost to himself.
But, as happens more often than not, there was not an unmarried man in
Butte old enough to be worthy of a fastidious woman’s notice. She would
have yawned in the face of “Brownies”, and, although more than one
roving husband would have placed himself at her disposal, she was the
last woman to court scandal or even gossip. She longed for the advent
of Lord John Mowbray, whose gayety would distract her mind, and whose
devotion make her forget that she was a neglected wife. She could throw
dust into the eyes of Butte by pretending to be his matrimonial sponsor.

But for the first time she wished that she had children. The great
house seemed to demand the patter of small feet, the slamming of
doors, a row of naughty faces peering over the banister of the second
floor. It was terribly silent. And yet she had felt settled down in
that house at once, so long had one of its kind been the object of her
unswerving desire; its atmosphere already seemed to hang listless with
ennui. She subscribed to both the state and city suffrage fund, for
she felt a new sympathy for women who were trying to fill their lives,
and sincerely hoped they would invent some game that would make them
independent of men.

Seventeen days after her return she was sitting in the library, trying
to forget her solitary luncheon in a novel when she heard the front
doorbell ring. Her servants were amiable but not too competent, and she
waited impatiently and in vain for one of them to answer the summons.
She restrained the impulse to open the door herself. This was now an
obsolete custom among her new acquaintance; although having the front
door shut in one’s face while the colored maid took one’s card to the
lady of the stately mansion was hardly an improvement, and this had
been her experience a day or two ago. She rang the bell in the library.
Still there was no sign of life from the high-priced young women who
doubtless were gossipping over the back fence. Ida’s curiosity overcame
her. The hour was too early for callers. It might be a cable. She stole
to the front door and peered through its curtain of Honiton lace. Then
she gave a war whoop which would have horrified her servants--who,
careless as they were, stood in awe of her--flung the door open, caught
Ora in her arms and almost carried her into the library.

“Good Lord, but I’m glad to see you!” she cried. “I’m just about dead
of lonesomeness. Why didn’t you telegraph? I’d have met you if your
train didn’t get in till two in the morning.”

Ora laughed and disentangled herself, although she kissed Ida warmly.
“I just got in--came here on the way from the station and sent my bags
to the house--but I always did hate to be met. How beautiful your house
is.”

“It’s all right. But it’s about as cheerful to live alone in as one
of those palaces in the Via Garibaldi! My, but I’m glad you’re here.
You’re the only person I ever missed, and being a real lady for weeks
on end is telling on my plebeian health. I didn’t have any relief even
in New York. How’s Mark?”

“Quite well, except for his broken leg.”

“Is he here?”

“Oh, no--I left him in Santa Barbara--that is to say at the Club House
at Montecito, the fashionable suburb. He has a jolly circle of friends
there, and has no desire to travel any further until he can walk.”

Ida put her hands on Ora’s shoulders and turned her round to the
light. “What’s up?” she demanded. “You look fine, as pretty as a
picture--but--different, somehow.”

“I’ve left Mark.”

Ida glanced into the hall. The opening of back doors indicated that one
of the maids had condescended to remember she was a wage earner. “Let’s
go upstairs,” said Ida; and as they crossed the hall she said to the
girl who was hastening to the front door with a propitiating smile,
“You’re just about ten minutes too late, as usual, and the next time it
happens you lose your job. I’m not the sort that sits down and wails
over the servant question. This house will be run properly if I have to
send East for help. Now put on your hat and run down to Mrs. Blake’s
house and bring up her bags, and tell them to send her trunks here.

“Yes, you’re going to stay with me for the present,” she said, as Ora
protested. “Don’t say another word about it.”

Ora shrugged her shoulders, and when they were in Ida’s bedroom she
took off her hat and coat and wandered about aimlessly for a few
moments. Ida was almost breathless with impatience and a curious sense
of apprehension that vaguely recalled the strange terror Ora had
inspired on the day of their meeting. Ora wore a blue frock, and Ida
noticed that the yellow room did not dim her fair radiance. If possible
she was holding her head higher than usual, her skin “gleamed” more
than ever, there was a curious light in her always brilliant eyes, half
defiant, half exultant.

“Do sit down!” said Ida sharply, cutting short Ora’s voluble approval
of the room. “There, that’s right,” as Ora flung herself into a chair.
“Now, fire away. You’re brimming over with something. Do you mean that
you’ve left Mark for good and all?”

“Yes.”

“Told him so?”

Ora nodded.

“Did you tell him about Valdobia, or what? For heaven’s sake open up.”

“No, I--I thought I wouldn’t tell him everything at once. I told him
that I meant to spend the rest of my life in Europe, and that it
was only fair to himself to divorce me--he can do it easily on the
ground of desertion--and marry someone who would make a real home for
him--make him happy.”

“Ah! Mark’s the sort women marry but don’t fall in love with. And what
did he say when you handed him that?”

“He was rather broken up.”

“Really! And you? I always had an idea that when it came to the point
you wouldn’t do it. You have high-falutin’ notions about honor,
noblesse oblige, and all the rest of it, to say nothing of being really
soft, as I once told you. There’s only one thing that would make you
hard--to everyone else--and that’s being in love----”

“That is it!” exclaimed Ora eagerly. “I’ve made up my mind to marry
Valdobia. I wasn’t so sure when I left Europe, but you know what
separation often does----”

“Yes,” said Ida dryly, “I do. Well, Mark will have to take his
medicine, I guess. I’ve never doubted, since Valdobia joined us in
Genoa, that he was the man for you. It’s fate, I guess. But tell me
what Mark said, after all. Did he consent?”

“There was nothing else to do. He knew I meant it. I broke it to
him by degrees. Besides, he knew how it was long before I left for
Europe. He had practically given me up. Of course he was fond of me--I
had become a habit and made him comfortable, besides being useful
to him--but--well, I gave him six years--my youth!” she burst out
passionately. “What wouldn’t I give to wipe out those years, be twenty
again and free! I tried to make him understand that I was no longer in
the least like the bewildered undeveloped girl he had married; and that
I bore as little resemblance to the intellectual automaton I made of
myself later. I told him that I was awake once for all, and that rather
than live again with a man I couldn’t care for I’d be boiled in oil.
Then he understood.”

“I should think he might! Of course he asked if there was another man?”

“Yes, but I told him that was neither here nor there; that in any case
I should leave him and live in Europe.”

“Poor Mark! Tied by the leg, and lost in the shuffle!”

“You know as well as I do that I have nothing in me for Mark and that
if I cared as little for Valdobia it would only be fair to give him
a second throw for happiness. When I left him he was quite resigned,
and we have agreed to remain the best of friends. I shall leave him my
power of attorney as before, and he will continue to manage my affairs.”

“How much more sensible we are in our Twentieth Century! No doubt he
will visit you in the Palazzo Valdobia when he takes a whirl at Europe.”

“Why not? But tell me you think I did right, Ida?” Ora’s voice was very
sweet and plaintive.

“You did what you were bound to do, I guess, when you met a man that
could throw a lariat round the neck of that romantic imagination of
yours. Right? I don’t know. I guess I’ve got the same old streak of
Puritan Americanism in me, although if other people want to have
_liaisons_ and divorces it’s none of my affair. Women will do more and
more as they damn please, I guess, men having set them such a good
example for a few centuries. But I simply hate the idea of losing you.
I want you right here in Butte. Lord, I’ve almost forgotten may slang!”

Ora laughed with something like her old merriment. “Oh, you’ll have
me for an escape valve for a while yet. Valdobia’s mother is dying of
some lingering horrible disease. It wouldn’t be decent for me to go to
Rome, and I should be lonely anywhere else. So, I’ve made up my mind
to stay here during the summer at least, and realise a dream I used
to indulge in before I ever knew I could fall in love.” Once more she
looked straight at Ida, this time with the slow expectant smile of a
child. “I’m going to reopen my mine and run it myself--of course I
shall have a manager. Mark has written, or telegraphed, to Mr. Compton
to find one for me--but I shall live out there and go down every day,
and make believe I am doing something, too--at all events realise that
it _is_ my mine. Mining has always--that is, always did fascinate me
more than anything else on earth. I shall be devoted to Valdobia when I
am married to him, but I simply must have that adventure first----”

“For heaven’s sake don’t go dotty like Gregory over a hole in the
ground. If you get that bee buzzing round in your skull I pity poor
Valdobia. If it were not for his mother I’d cable to him to come
out----”

Ora’s face set with a hardness that arrested Ida’s observant eye.
“Don’t you do anything of the sort. Mark said once about my father,
‘It was characteristic of him that when he quit he quit for good.’ I
am always discovering more and more of my father in me. I’ll live that
old dream and it will finish when Valdobia and I both are free. Then I
shall wipe it off the slate--consign it to limbo.” She sprang to her
feet and stretched out her arms. “I am going to do exactly as I please
as long as I am free. Of course I am mad about Valdobia--you know that
I wouldn’t marry him if I were not--but I am mad too about liberty and
my mine. This is my only chance. And I am a Montanan, born in the Rocky
Mountains. I want something of the life that has made my state famous
before I become a European. I’ve never had anything of her but Butte. I
want the wild mountains--I want, above all, the mine that has given me
my freedom. I’m going to wear overalls and go down into the mine every
day.”

“A sweet sight you’ll be!” said Ida disgustedly. “And the miners--Oh,
they’ll just love the idea of having a woman at their heels! What on
earth has got hold of you? It’s the only time I’ve ever known you
to get off your base. Why, there’s nothing a woman can do at a mine
unless she’s a graduated mining engineer, and nothing then that a man
couldn’t do better. You’ll be in the way and you’ll soon be bored to
death yourself. If you’re so crazy about Montana why don’t you do some
of those great things for her that your father suggested? And how do
you reconcile your marriage to an Italian with your devotion to your
father’s memory?”

Ora turned away her head. “My father gave me too much of himself to
expect me to play the rôle of ministering angel to anything. I intend
to invest in Montana the greater part of all that I take out of my
mine. If it gives me one of the great fortunes I shall endow my state
in some way--as Mark may suggest. But I cannot live here. That is
for ever settled. When I go to Europe I shall never return--not even
to America. I shall forget my life here, everything connected with
it--everything! One side of me is already European. I shall become
wholly so.”

“Somehow,” said Ida slowly, and with the sensation of being so close
to something that she couldn’t see it, “I don’t get the idea that
you’re so mad about Valdobia. Long since I figured that when you did
love a man you’d be a sort of white pillar of flame about him. I
firmly believe that Valdobia is the man for you, but, well--he fell
too quickly. He didn’t make you suffer, never kept you guessing for
a minute. The women that turn men’s heads are a good deal like men
themselves; they’ve got to be hurt hard and kept on tenterhooks before
they are in a condition to accommodate the virus. You are fond of
Valdobia, and well you may be, but mad isn’t the right word----”

“Oh, yes it is! It is!” Ora was walking up and down the room. “You must
believe that I love him as I never dreamed I could love anybody----”

“Hi!” cried Ida. “Your letter-man! That’s what! You were more nearly in
love with him than you are with Valdobia, and because, for some reason
or other, you couldn’t get him. Where is he?”

Ora’s eyes looked large and blank. “That! I had quite forgotten it.
It was the last of a long line of mental love affairs. Those always
evaporate even from the memory when the real man comes along.” She
sighed heavily and sat down once more. “I know that I shall be happy
with Valdobia, only I am not happy now. That is so far off! And of
course I feel badly about poor Mark. But I couldn’t help it. Not to do
it would have been worse. And I should go off my head meanwhile if I
didn’t have this mine. Do you think I could remain here in Butte and go
to dinners and bridge parties? I should scream in their faces. I must
have work. Be sure I can find something to do at the mine--I suppose
there are a laboratory and assay office. And there will always be the
excitement of hoping to find free milling gold--at present what could
be more exciting than to drift for that lost vein?”

“It wouldn’t keep me awake nights. But have your own way. I don’t want
you down with nerves, and that will happen if you don’t look out.”

“If I don’t get my own way.”

“Exactly. But I wish your way marched with mine. I’ve missed you like
fury--Say!--here’s an idea: I’ll go back to Europe with you now if you
like, and stay until you marry. There are lots of places we planned to
go to and didn’t----”

“Ida, you are a dear! And you longed so for Butte. Why it would be like
tearing an author from his unfinished magnum opus. Besides--well--you
have a husband----”

“Oh, Lord! Gregory is running the Universe at present. Women don’t
exist for him. Shall we go?”

Ora shook her head. Her face had turned from white to pale. “No. I must
spend these last months of my freedom here in my state. And that lost
vein--it pulls me. I _must_ have that life for a few months--for the
first and last time. You--you--might spend your week-ends with me.”

Ida scowled and turned away her head. She had no intention of admitting
even to Ora that Gregory deliberately avoided her. “Not I. I hate the
sight of the De Smet ranch. Go, if you like, but I feel sure you will
come in often. And before you go I wish you would do me a favour.”

“Of course I will.”

“Let me give you a dinner. I want to begin that sort of thing and
you’ll furnish the excuse besides helping me out.”

“Very well. Have it soon. I want to go to the mine as quickly as
possible. I shall begin to send out the furniture for my bungalow
tomorrow.”

“A week’s notice will be enough. I’ll write the invitations today.
There’s another reason I want to give this dinner. Gregory hasn’t been
seen anywhere with me--hates going out. But I shall make him understand
that he must come to my first dinner--or people will be talking--and I
hate people prying into my affairs. Besides, it will be his duty to you
as the wife of his best friend. (He needn’t know you’ve left Mark yet
awhile.) I’m not hankering for the rôle of the neglected wife; and I’m
sick of making excuses. For all Butte knew I might not have laid eyes
on my husband since my return.”

And although she spoke bravely Ora knew that she had not. “We’ll have
the dinner,” she said warmly. “And it will be great fun to get it
up----”

“Now, come this minute and go to bed. You are to stay with me as
long as you are in this camp, and I’m going to tone you up, and make
you rest as we used to in Europe every afternoon--hard work in this
altitude but it can be done. I’ve got to go to a bridge party now, and
you are to sleep. If you feel rested when I get back, I’ll call up two
or three of your old friends and ask them to come informally to dinner.
So long.”

She closed the door of her best spare room on Ora and walked slowly
back to her own, her brows drawn; once more quick with a sensation
of profound uneasiness, of being close to something that she could
not see. But it was not her habit to ponder for long over the elusive
and obscure. “Guess I’m worried about Ora’s health,” she thought
impatiently, and rang for her maid.