XXXIV


On the following day they lunched at a large restaurant opposite
the Bourse, a favourite resort of the two girls; it amused them to
watch the keen clever business men of Genoa at their midday meal in
leisurely conversation and enjoyment of their excellent food and wine;
contrasting them with the American who took five minutes for lunch,
achieving dyspepsia instead of nutriment, and possibly accomplishing
less than a race which has been commercial and acquisitive since the
dawn of its history. There is little real poverty in Genoa and great
wealth.

They had come too late to secure one of the tables overlooking the
Piazzi Defarrari, and were facing the windows, at one of the longer
tables, when Valdobia, who sat opposite, rose with a word of apology
and went behind them to greet a man with a pleasant English voice.

“Lord John Mowbray,” whispered Ida. “He’s all right, but, lord, I’ll be
glad to get back to a country where a few men are plain mister.”

Nevertheless, as the Englishman bent over her with a delighted word of
greeting, she lifted her heavy eyes to his with the expression of one
whose long suppressed hopes have blossomed at last.

“I wish I could join you,” he said ruefully, “but I am with a party of
friends.”

“Get rid of them after lunch,” murmured Ida, “and come with us. We
are going to explore all those interesting little streets down in the
gulch--that is to say the ravine, or whatever it was once--and it would
be jolly to have you along.”

“I will,” he said, with fervour, “and I know what a gulch is. My
brother is ranching in Wyoming, and I may join him there in a few
months. I believe he also has interests in Butte.”

“Good! We’ll begin to get friendly right now. So long.” Valdobia
returned to his chair, and she asked, “Is he a brother of your Wyoming
friend?”

“He is, and no doubt we’ll go out together. Your Northwest must be the
realest thing left in the world.”

“It’s that, all right. And it will be no end of fun having you out
there!” She smiled sardonically, and Ora coloured and moved restlessly.
She was vaguely aware of a new drama unfolding, and had no wish to
analyse it.

Mowbray, to Ida’s satisfaction, not only deserted his friends after
luncheon, but permitted them to go on to Rome without him and lingered
in Genoa. He was a fair well set-up young Englishman, with a nonchalant
manner and an inflammable heart. Ida had met him at a country house and
amused herself “landing him,” but as she had left England immediately
after, and hunting had claimed all his ardours, she neither had seen
nor heard from him since. Although she meant to keep him at her elbow
as long as he served her purpose, she knew him to be a shy youth under
his natural buoyancy and quick intelligence, and did not disturb her
placid mind with visions of “scenes.” On the whole she liked Englishmen
better than any of the men she had met in Europe, for they had more
pride and self-control where women were concerned; if things went
deeper with them they were less likely to offend her cold purity with
outbursts of passion: which, she confided to Ora, “made her sick.”

To her delight Valdobia took them one afternoon to call on an elderly
relative who lived in one of the great palaces of the Via Garibaldi.
They were escorted up to the top floor; the rooms on the other
_pianos_ were either closed or emitted the chill breath of the tomb.
Their destination was a large lofty room, inadequately heated by a
stove in one corner; their noble hostess was fortified against the
cold by several shawls and a foot-warmer. She had invited three other
aristocratic relics in to look at “the Americans,” and, although the
principessa and her friends were more polite than they would have been
to intruding bourgeoises of their own country, it was apparent that
they could find little to say to two young women from a land of which
they had a confused and wholly contemptuous apprehension. They knew
that its chief title to fame was its original discovery by a Genoese,
that the lower classes emigrated to it a good deal, and that many
American women, who spent far too much money on their clothes, visited
Europe and occasionally married above them. More than this they neither
knew nor cared to know. So far as they were concerned new countries did
not exist.

Conversation languished. Ida was suppressed, and divided between a
desire to laugh and to scream. Ora, with a heroic effort, talked about
the mistake the average American made in seeing so little of Genoa;
but, having laid aside her furs out of politeness, she was shivering,
and unable to drink the strong coffee which immediately succumbed to
the temperature of the room.

She sent an appealing glance to Valdobia, who was smiling to himself.
Lord John, who had been honoured by a chair beside his hostess, treated
with the consideration due his ancient lineage, was delivering himself
of spasmodic clauses, with one eye on Valdobia.

“Jimminy!” whispered Ida, who now felt quite at home with her fellow
conspirator, “if you don’t get us out of this quick I’ll have
high-strikes, and Ora’ll get a cold and be laid up for a week. I always
keep her in bed when she has a cold.”

Valdobia rose instantly. “We have an engagement in half an hour,” he
said to his mother’s second cousin. “Perhaps you will permit me to show
these ladies over the palace?”

“Oh, do!” exclaimed Mowbray, acting on instinct, for he was too cold
and too unnerved to think. “I’d like jolly well to see it myself; must
be rippin’.”

The permission was given with some graciousness, and the party bowed
themselves out. As they descended the grand staircase, they heard a
buzz of voices behind them, as of several elderly ladies talking at
once.

“We’d be roasting on red-hot coals this minute if there were any in
that refrigerator,” said Ida, “but I don’t care so long as we are going
to see the real part of the palace.”

An aged major domo showed them through the magnificent reception rooms,
built for entertaining a proud and gorgeous aristocracy in the days
when Genoa was known throughout Europe as “La Superba.” They were hung
with tapestries or cordova leather, and filled with priceless pictures,
porcelains, enamels, gold and silver ware, and massive furniture.
Valdobia told them dramas sentimental and tragic which had been
enacted within the walls of the historic house. But they had to stamp
about to avoid a chill, and were glad to emerge into the warmer air of
even the narrow street.

“Well,” announced Ida, as they walked rapidly out of the Via Garibaldi
into the broad sunshine of the Piazza delle Fontane Marose, “if
that’s a sample of your ancient aristocracy no more of it in mine. My
curiosity is satisfied for good and all. Why on earth don’t they live
like human beings?”

“Or steam-heated Americans?” asked Valdobia, smiling. “Console yourself
with the assurance that you are the only Americans that have ever
crossed that threshold.”

“It doesn’t console me one little bit, and I feel pneumonia coming on.
Let’s walk as fast as we know how!” And accompanied by the willing
Englishman she started off with a stride that soon left the others far
behind.

“It is true,” said Valdobia disgustedly, “that this older generation
does not know how to live, not in any sense. They possess the greatest
wealth in Italy, and they hoard it as if poverty stared them in the
face. They have only to turn on the electric lights once a week and
provide a simple supper to make Genoa one of the most delightful cities
in Europe, but they won’t even do that. They have the finest jewels
in Italy and never wear them except on the rare occasions when the
King and Queen visit Genoa and command them to the royal palace. Thank
heaven there is a younger set, equally well born, that live in the new
apartment houses or in those villas up on the hills, and are neither
too economical nor too antiquated in their ideas to enjoy life. Those
old people are divided up into intimate little sets and spend their
lives gossipping about the rest of Genoa or talking of the past. But I
do hope you did not take cold.”

“I didn’t, and I really enjoyed it!” said Ora, smiling mischievously.
“I amused myself thinking what would happen if I told our uncomfortable
hostess that my father’s sister had married a Roman relative of her
husband; but I wouldn’t have relieved the situation for the world. I
suppose they are fumigating themselves.”

“I don’t doubt it. They think they are aristocratic and are merely
provincial.”

“How different you are!” Ora looked at him admiringly. “One hardly
could believe that you belonged to the same race.”

“I don’t. I am a Roman, and a citizen of the world. No doubt you, too,
have a root that runs back into the dark ages, but today is all that
counts with us. I mean that in more senses than one!” And, although he
smiled, he gave her a quick side-glance.

“I hope so. I am well aware that you are enjoying yourself immensely.”
Ora felt it quite safe to flirt with him in the open street.

“Do you like me a little better?”

“Rather. Friendly companionship is my chief idea of happiness, now that
I am more or less tired of books.”

“Is it? May it be my good fortune to initiate you into a higher! You
have everything to learn!”

“Have I? I wonder!”

“What do you mean by that? Have you ever been in love?”

“Not the least little bit!”

“You said that rather too vehemently. It is my turn to wonder.” This
time he looked hard at her and his face was grim. He had a way of
setting his jaw that reminded her of the man whose haunting memory had
made her alternately happy and miserable during many long months. She
looked away hastily.

“The kind of love you mean I have not the very least knowledge of. You
must believe that.”

“Of what other kind, then?”

“Oh, all women dream, you know,” she said lightly. “They have a sort of
ideal that consoles them for missing the realities of life. You come
quite close to it,” and once more she sparkled her eyes at him.

“I have no intention of letting you flirt with me,” said Valdobia
calmly. “My flirting days are over. I shall remain the best of your
friends until you love me or send me to the other end of the world.”

“Well, don’t become serious and spoil everything.”

“I shall not lose my head, if that is what you mean,” he said drily. “I
find the present state of affairs very pleasant. Let us overtake the
others and go for a drive.”