XXIX


Meanwhile the story of the Compton-Amalgamated war was the sensation
not only of Montana but of the entire country. The Butte morning
papers ignored it, but the _Evening Bugle_ reaped a golden harvest.
The editor himself, who was the Montana correspondent of one of the
great New York dailies, made his reputation with the most sensational
“stuff” that had gone from the Northwest since Heinze retired from the
field. The hill swarmed with reporters. Two Eastern newspapers sent
special correspondents to the spot. In less than a fortnight the public
knew all there was to know and far more. Perch of the Devil Mine was
photographed inside and out, and its uncompromising ugliness but added
to its magnetism; which emanated from a “solid hill of metal just below
a thin layer of barren soil.” The general reader, who admired the
colour of copper, conceived that it emerged in solid sheets.

Gregory refused to be interviewed or photographed, but was snapshotted;
and his long sinewy figure and lean dark face, his narrow eyes and
fine mouth, won the championship of every woman partial to the type.
The women’s papers, as well as those run by radicals, socialists, and
conservative men of independent tendencies, advocated his cause against
the wicked trust; nor was there a newspaper in the country, however
capitalised, that resisted the temptation to make him “big news.” To
his unspeakable annoyance he began to receive letters by the score,
most of them from women; but he lost no time employing a secretary
whose duty was to read and burn them. He appreciated his fame very
vaguely, for between his mine and the innumerable details connected
with his new ranch, he had little time to devote to newspapers or his
own sensations. But although personal notoriety was distasteful to him
and reporters a nuisance, he felt more than compensated by the success
of his publicity scheme, and the assurance that it was causing the
enemy unspeakable annoyance and apprehension.

He paid a visit to Chicago after work had begun on the first tunnel,
and spent several days with the interested but cautious officials
of the greatest of the land selling companies. Like all silent men,
when he did talk it was not only to the point, but he used carefully
composed arguments incisively expressed. He indulged in no rhetorical
flights, no enthusiasms, no embellishment of plain facts. He might
have been a mathematician working out an abstract problem in algebra;
and this attitude, combined with his reputation as a “winner”, and the
details of his cautious purchase of Circle-G Ranch, finally impressed
the company to the extent of sending one of their number, who was an
expert in land values, to the ranch. Gregory accompanied him, took him
to the mountain river, showed him the engineer’s report, pointed out
the undeviating slope between the river and the ranch, and the land’s
rich chocolate brown soil of unlimited depth. The upshot was that the
expert returned to Chicago almost as enthusiastic as if the original
scheme were his. After consultation with several of the seed houses,
the land company agreed to buy on Compton’s terms, and to pay $200,000
down, $500,000 at the end of sixty days, and $700,000 at the end of
four months.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ora and Ida had asked for an extension of leave, as they had not
yet “done” Italy, Spain, and Egypt, and both husbands had given a
willing consent; Gregory from sheer indifference; Mark because he was
so busy that he no longer had time to miss his wife. He refused to
give Ora’s picture to the enterprising correspondents, but they found
no difficulty with the local photographer. They had not been long
uncovering the romantic history of the Oro Fino Primo Mine, and it made
a welcome pendant to the still recourseful “story” of Perch of the
Devil. Ora’s beauty, accomplishments, charm, family history, as well
as her present social progress in company with her “equally beautiful
friend”, the wife of the hero of the hour, became public property.

Altogether, Butte, after several years of oblivion, was happy and
excited. So far, although mineralogically the most sensational state
in the Union, and the third in size, she had given to the world but
four highly specialized individuals: Marcus Daly, perhaps the greatest
mine manager and ore wizard of our time; W. A. Clark, who accumulated
millions as a moving picture show rolls in dimes; F. Augustus Heinze,
who should be the greatest financial power in America if brains
were all; and the Sapphic, coruscatic, imperishable Mary McLane. An
outstanding quartette. But Daly was dead, Clark was but one of many
millionaires, submerged in New York, Heinze was reaping the whirlwind,
and the poet was nursing her wounds. Montana was in the mood for a new
hero, and the American press for a new and picturesque subject to “play
up for all he was worth.”