XXII


Ora got into the skip and was whisked to the surface.

She drew the veil over her head and face, wishing dimly that she had
gone home through the mines; but a moment later the veil fell to her
shoulders unnoticed. As she crossed the Apex claim she was vaguely
aware that someone, almost in her path, lifted his hat. She bowed
automatically, feeling like those poor wound-up royalties who must
smile graciously upon their loyal people even though a cancer devour
the body or the brain reel with sorrow.

Whalen, abnormal in vanity and conceit though he was, took no
offence; not only was this in his estimation the one great lady of
the Western annex, but he was startled by the expression in her fixed
eyes of anguish, terror, and surprise. He had seen Gregory Compton go
down into his mine not a half an hour ago, and it was easy for his
fictionised if unimaginative mind to conjure up a hazy picture of the
scene underground. He turned very red, partly from gratification at
being so close to human passion and pain, but more from the knowledge
that he shortly could offer all the elements for another and a still
more dramatic crisis. At the same time he could do the one woman he
admired in this wilderness a good turn and heal his cankerous ache for
vengeance.

Ora went on to her little house and sank into a chair before the
burnt-out logs. Her body felt as if it were a vessel into which
had been poured all the waters of woman’s bitterness and despair.
Nevertheless, her predominant sensation was astonishment. For a year
she had lived in a fool’s paradise, indissolubly mated with Gregory
Compton. It was only in the moment when the idea of his own divorce
flashed into her mind that she realised she had meant to have him for
ever, that her imagination had been a mere playground on which she had
romped, and abruptly abandoned when she saw reality standing at the
gate.

Since that day, interrupted only by the fevers and doubts of love,
she had accepted with joy her predestined fate as the visible mate
of Gregory Compton. Else what did it all mean? She had counted
on marriage, but that respectable solution had faded into utter
insignificance as soon as the shock of Ida’s refusal had passed. To
fling the world aside, to regard it as a mere whirling speck in the
void, followed as a matter of course. She and this man would fill all
space.

And she had lost. It was over. _Over. Over._ For a time the
astonishment consequent upon the mental reiteration of this fact held
her. Her mind, quick, alert, sinuous as she had always found it, was
unable to readjust itself. How could anything be over that manifestly
had been created to go on for ever? What, then, did it all mean: that
mutual recognition when they had sat together that night in Butte,
that long mental obsession, this later perfect understanding, this
indubitable power to find in each other complete happiness? Over. And
by the man’s decree. How odd. How odd. And what a tragic waste.

She knew that the mine had pulled him, but she was too much the woman
to take a mine seriously. There had been some other reason. He loved
her; she never doubted that. He had resisted--why? She groped back
through her limited experience, wondering if the trouble were that
she had had so little. Life had not begun with her until a year ago.
She had been a mere student, deliberately living in the unreal, often
deluding, world of books, the worst of all preparations for life.

Some women were independent of experience, knew men by instinct. She
felt that Ida, in a similar situation, would have had her way. She
had not managed cleverly; no doubt with all her charm and her natural
allurement for men, even a certain acquired coquetry, she was one of
those women that could theorise brilliantly, but failed utterly to
manage their own affairs at critical moments.

She was well aware that she had not been developing along ideal
lines of late, particularly since she had come out here with the
unadmitted intention of stealing her friend’s husband. By all the laws
of tradition she should be wicked all through. Pride, diffidence,
fastidiousness--one or all, she was in no condition to decide--had
prevented her from playing the deliberate rôle of siren. She sighed and
wished that life could be played upon the formula adopted by so many
brilliant novelists: a steady unrelenting development of character upon
strictly logical lines and by means of cunningly created situations,
that was as much like life as a mother’s formula would be for the
thoughts and deeds of her children at a given hour a year hence.

Ora did not know that most people in their rare moments of honest
introspection find themselves singularly imperfect. She had looked for
greater consistency in her complex recesses; assuming that if she made
up her mind to take the husband of any woman, and that woman her best
friend, she would be wholly hard and wicked, and, for the sake of the
result, quite willing to achieve this consistent imperfection. And such
hardness would be the surest of all solaces in the event of failure.
She felt neither hard nor nearly as wicked as she should, but she did
recognise the fact that if she had one more chance she would win by
hook or crook.

Her thoughts swung to Ida. What had she said to Gregory in that last
decisive interview? Ida was as clever as the devil. She would watch
her chance and make just the right appeal at the right moment. Gregory
could be ruthless to the woman of whom he had wearied or to the woman
he loved, but if his wife played upon his honour, his Western chivalry,
his sense of fair play, and reiterated her own rights--to her would he
lower his flag if it struck the life out of his own heart, and left
himself nothing to feed the deep passion and romance of his nature for
the rest of his life.

In any case Ida had won.

Once more Ora wished that she had gone to work when she found herself
penniless after her father’s death. She would have developed normally,
and it was unthinkable that in the little world of Butte she would not
have met Gregory Compton while he was free. Then not only would she be
happy today but know nothing of those abysmal depths in her soul which
she execrated while yielding to them and lamenting that for the time
being they were no worse. Love may be divine when all goes well, or
one is born into the cult of the martyr, but when it comes too late
to passionate natures associated with virile and accomplished minds,
it can be the very spawn of hell. Ora’s regret that she was not of the
breed of those finished wantons of history that rose to fame on the
shattered hearts of men was born of expediency. Could she have been
given her choice and Gregory Compton she would have elected to be fine
and noble, consummating the lofty dictates of her superior intellectual
endowment. Not yet had she realised that lacking a ruthless centralised
ideal, rarely allied to brilliant intellects, the souls of women even
more than those of men (who have less time and more poise) are the
playthings of Circumstance.

She became aware that her Chinaman was crossing the room, and before
she could refocus her wandering mental vision and intercept him, he had
opened the front door and admitted Professor Whalen.