XXX


Ora and Ida were sitting at one of the little round tables in the
pretty green and wicker smoking-room of the Hotel Bristol in Genoa,
drinking their coffee and smoking their after-luncheon cigarettes, when
Ida, who was glancing over the _Herald_, cried,

“Aw!”

Ora looked round in surprise. Ida often relieved the strain when they
were alone by relapsing into the vernacular, but was impressively
elegant in public.

“What is it?” she asked apprehensively. “Anybody we know dead? That is
about all the news we ever get in these Continental----”

“Dead nothing. Greg’s struck a bigger bonanza than I had any idea
of, and Amalgamated is after it. They tried to corral your mine for
delinquent taxes, but got left. Found a bit of unclaimed land between
your claim and the ranch and staked off. They’re sinking a shaft and
mean to prove that the vein--Greg’s--apexes in their claim. Wouldn’t
that come and get you! Just listen.” And she read aloud an embellished
but not untruthful tale. “Glory, I hope they don’t get him! That would
be the end of all my fond dreams.”

“I have an idea that Mr. Compton was born to win. At all events you
have your new house in Butte, and all the money you can spend for the
present.”

“Yes, but I want money to spend in Butte, live in that house, and make
things hum. However, I guess you’re right. I’ll bet on Greg. Here come
the letters. Hope you get one from Mark as I’d like some real news.”

A page with letters in his hand had entered the room. He served the
young American ladies first as their tips were frequent and munificent,
particularly Ora’s. The other people in the room were English and
Italian.

Ida’s letters were from Ruby and Pearl. Ora’s from Mark, Professor
Becke, and two of her English friends. She opened her husband’s first.
It contained an account of the threatened loss of her mine, her narrow
escape, and Gregory’s rescue. It was graphically written. Mark fancied
himself as a letter writer and never was averse from impressing his
clever wife.

Ora’s face flushed as she read; she lost her breath once or twice.
She pictured every expression of Gregory’s eyes as he perforated the
clerk; her heart hammered its admiration. She was too thoroughly
Montanan and the daughter of her father to be horrified at bribery and
corruption. For the moment she forgot gratitude in her exultation that
he had triumphed over the mightiest trust in the country. But before
she finished the letter she sighed and set her lips. She handed it
deliberately to Ida.

“Here is an account of the first development,” she said casually. “It
will interest you.”

Ida read the letter hastily. “Well, they caught him napping after all,”
she said with profound dissatisfaction. “He dreams too much, that’s
what. He’s got a practical side all right, but he isn’t on the job all
the time. I’d like to write and tell him what I think of him but guess
I’d better keep my mouth shut.”

“It was Mark’s fault as much as Mr. Compton’s--more. He should have had
a new map made of my claim; or, if he did have one made, he should have
studied it more carefully. Anybody to look at it would assume that it
touched the boundary line of your--Mr. Compton’s ranch.”

“Well, Greg’ll get out of it some way. When he does sit up and take
notice he doesn’t so much as wink, and so far as he knew or cared the
rest of the world might have waltzed off into space. Lucky it hit him
to buy the house and send that last five thousand before he snapped
close on Amalgamated----”

“What does Miss Miller have to say?”

“Nothing much but ecstasies over my house. The Murphys had taste, it
seems, so I won’t have to do a thing to it. Say, Ora, don’t you feel as
if you’d like to go back?”

Ora looked up and her face turned white. “Go back? I thought you wanted
to stay over here for a year, at least. We haven’t half seen Europe
yet--to say nothing of Egypt.”

“Yes--I know--but sometimes I feel homesick. It isn’t only that I want
to make Butte sit up; but--well, I suppose you’ll laugh, but I miss
the mountains. I never thought much about them when I was there, but
they’ve kind of haunted me lately.”

“There are mountains in Europe.”

“I know, but they’re just scenery. Our mountains are different.”

Ora looked at her speculatively. It was not the first time that Ida
had surprised her with glow-worms flitting across her spiritual night,
although she seemed to be so devoid of imagination, or what she would
have called superfluous nonsense, as to inspire her more highly
organised friend with envy. Her mental and artistic development had
been rapid and remarkable but uneven. She yawned through the opera and
symphony concerts. She would always be bored by pictures unless she
could read a “story” in them, although she had now mastered the jargon
of art as well as most of her quick-witted country-women. In Florence
and Rome she had “struck” after one morning of picture galleries, but
she showed a spontaneous and curious appreciation of the architecture
of the Renaissance. Ora had expected the usual ecstasies over the old
castles of England and Germany, but although Ida admired them heartily,
and even declared they made her feel “real romantic,” it was for the
Renaissance palaces of France and of the cities they visited in Italy
that she reserved her instant and critical admiration. Ora, who like
most imaginative people played with the theory of reincarnation, amused
herself visioning Ida in Burne-Jones costumes, haunting the chill
midnight corridors of a Florentine palace, dagger in hand, or brewing
a poisoned bowl. If Ida possessed a rudimentary soul, which suffered
a birth-pang now and then, Ora had caught more than one glimpse of a
savage temper combined with a cunning that under her present advantages
was rapidly developing into subtlety. But Ida indulged too little in
introspection to develop her inmost ego other than automatically. To
mental progress she was willing to devote a certain amount of labour.
Whenever they were not on a train or visiting at country houses, she
spent an hour every morning with a teacher of either French or Italian;
German she had refused to “tackle,” but, to use her own phrase, she
“ate up” the Latin languages, and her diction was remarkably good. If
picture galleries replete with saints, virgins, madonnas and Venuses
bored her, she returned more than once to the portrait rooms in the
Pitti and the Uffizi galleries, haunted the museums with their mediæval
and Renaissance furniture and tapestries, and eagerly visited every
palace to which the public was admitted.

And she proved herself as adaptable as Ora had hoped. In England she
bored her way through the newspapers until she was able to sustain her
part in political conversation. She soon discerned that English people
of assured position and wide social experience liked a certain degree
of picturesque Americanism when it was unaccompanied by garrulity
or blatant ill-breeding. She amused herself by “giving them what
they wanted,” and was a more pronounced success than Ora, who was
outwardly too much like themselves, yet lacking the matchless fortune
of English birth. But this did not disturb Ora, who made more real
friends, and derived endless amusement observing Ida. On one occasion
they visited for a week at one of the country homes of a duke and
duchess that had entertained Mrs. Stratton many years ago, and Ida had
enchanted these bored but liberal products of a nation that led with
too much indifference the Grand March of Civilisation with her Western
“breeziness” and terminology (carefully selected), combined with her
severely cut and altogether admirable gowns, and her fine imposing
carriage. From this castle she went on with Ora to one leased by an
ambitious American more English than the English, who permitted herself
to indulge in a very little fashionable slang, but had consigned the
American vernacular to oblivion in the grave of her ancestors. Here Ida
was languid and correct (save at the midnight hour when she sought Ora,
not only for relaxation but the instructions she was never too proud to
receive); her English slang (which she had “swapped” for much of her
own with her various British admirers) was impeccable, and she flirted
like a stage duchess.

She estimated the various aristocracies she entered under Ora’s wing
as a grand moving picture show run for the benefit of Americans, and
was grateful to have an inside seat, although nothing would have bored
her more than to take a permanent position in their midst. With their
history, traditions, psychology, she concerned herself not at all; nor
did she in any way manifest a desire to cultivate the intellectual
parts of her shrewd, observing, clutching brain. She threw away as many
opportunities as she devoured, but on the whole proved herself somewhat
more adaptable than the usual American woman elevated suddenly from the
humbler walks of life to the raking searchlights of Society. In Berlin
and Vienna she repeated her social triumphs, for, although Americans
do not penetrate far below the crust of Continental society, smart
men abound in the crust; Ida graduated as an adept in flirtation with
agreeable and subtle men of the world, yet keeping the most practical
at arm’s length with a carefully calculated Western directness and
artlessness that amounted to genius.

In France and Italy the dazzling fairness of Ora had its innings. A
vague suggestion of unreality, almost morbid, and a very definite one
of unawakened womanhood, combined with a cultivated mind, ready wit,
and air of high breeding, gave her a success as genuine as Ida’s and
somewhat more perilous. But she soon learned to tread warily, after her
theories of European men had been vindicated by personal experience.
In fact, after the two girls had ceased to be mere tourists they had
taken the advice of one of Mrs. Stratton’s friends and enlisted the
services of an indigent lady of title as chaperon. Lady Gower had been
little more than a figurehead but had served her purpose in averting
gossip; and now that her charges were tourists again had returned to
her lodgings in Belgravia. As maids also are a doubtful luxury when
travelling they had recently dismissed the last of a long line.

On the whole the two girls had got on together amazingly well. They had
had their differences of opinion, but Ora was too proud to quarrel,
Ida too easy-going and appreciative of the butter on her bread. It was
fortunate, however, that Gregory had been able to provide his wife
with an abundance of money, for she was far too shrewd, and far too
interested in prices, to remain hoodwinked for long. After three months
of sight-seeing and _pensions_ both had been glad to leave the tourist
class and mingle in the more spectacular life of the great world, and
that had meant trousseaux in Paris. There Ida had “gowned” herself
for the first time, and her delight in her fashionable wardrobe had
been equalled only by her satisfaction in driving a bargain. At present
they were resting in Genoa, a favourite city of Ora’s, after a hard ten
weeks in Rome.