XI


“How did you guess?” asked Ora.

“I didn’t guess. I saw a drill hole just beyond where my men were
working. I also did a little quick deduction. Miners blast just before
they go off shift. The afternoon change of shift is at three o’clock.
As I told you I had seen the Apex men come up about one o’clock when
their compressor stopped. That hole not only told me that they were
closer than we had thought, but that they were up to devilment. I
guessed that they had timed to blast just before we were ready to drill
at that point. Were you very much frightened?”

“I didn’t like it.” Ora knew that bravery in woman makes no appeal to
the lordly male. “But I hardly had time to think; and after all you
left me nothing to do.”

“Well, you were game and didn’t scream or cry,” he conceded handsomely.
“Let’s light up.”

They had walked as far as the station at the foot of the shaft. Gregory
unlocked the door of a small cupboard, found two candles and inserted
them in miners’ candlesticks that were stabbed into the walls. They
flickered in the draft as a skip rattled up from the second level, but
relieved the oppressive darkness.

“Why, your hair is down!” exclaimed Gregory.

Ora put up a hand. “So it is! Well--I am sure I never should know if my
hair fell down at a good play, and ours was live drama. I’ll braid it
and put on my veil up above.”

He watched her for a moment as she sat on a box braiding her long fair
hair, vaguely recalling the legend of the Lorelei. He noticed that her
eyes as she peered up at him looked green in that uncertain light. But
in a moment his thoughts wandered from her. He folded his arms and
stared downward.

Ora leaned back against the wall. She saw that he had forgotten her,
but had made up her mind to accept him as he was; she had no more
desire to dictate his moods than to read in advance the book of the
next two months. There was the same pleasurably painful vibration in
her nerves as on the night when she had piled stake upon stake at Monte
Carlo. From that scene her thoughts travelled naturally to Valdobia and
she suddenly laughed aloud.

“What are you laughing at?” demanded Gregory suspiciously.

“I was trying to imagine that we were imprisoned in the underground
dungeon of an Italian palace in the middle ages.”

“Hard work, I should think. Although if we had a cave-in I guess the
results would be about the same.”

“And you? Were you seeing your minerals winking three thousand feet
below?”

He laughed then, and sat beside her. “At all events the mystery down
there is more romantic than your mediæval dungeons--and so will the
great underground caverns be when the ores have been taken out.”

“Pity the caverns--stopes!--have to be filled up with débris to prevent
the mine caving in,” said Ora flippantly. “I went underground in Butte
last week--to the eighteenth level of the Leonard. Nothing but endless
streets and cross-alleys, all numbered----”

“And you didn’t find that interesting?” he asked indignantly. “To be
a third of a mile below the surface of the earth and find it laid out
like a city, with streets and rooms, and stations ten times as large as
this, and lighted with electricity?”

“Yes, but the knowledge that you have a third of a mile of those
streets and rooms--seventeen levels of them--on top of you, supported
only by waste rock in the stopes, and timbers that are always snapping
in two from the terrific pressure--timbermen working at every
turn--‘Save YOURSELF’ the first thing you see when you leave that
cage--Oh, well, I felt there was quite enough romance on top of the
earth.”

“I am deeply disappointed in you. You told me once--why, even
lately----”

“Oh, I haven’t changed the least little bit. Nothing in life,” and she
looked at him with laughing eyes, “interests me as much at present
as these two mines. But I am thankful that we are still within a
reasonable distance of the surface. I am quite content to screw up
my eyes and wander in fancy among the primary deposits close to the
central fires. If I had a mine like yours, full of the beautiful copper
ores instead of that hideous pyroxenite of mine, I should leave a
glittering layer in every stope, support the roof with polished stone
columns, light with hidden electric bulbs, and wander from one to the
other imagining myself in Aladdin’s palace.”

“A fine practical miner you would make. It’s lucky that your mine is
pyroxenite, not quartz. That is if you want to live in Europe.--Do you?”

“Of course. What have I in this part of the world? A mine cannot
satisfy a woman for ever. I suppose you wouldn’t care if you never saw
a woman again!”

“Oh!” He was looking hard at her.

“What else were you thinking of just now?” asked Ora, with that
perverse desire to be superficial which so often possesses American
women in decisive moments.

He sighed impatiently. “I’ve got a big job on my hands, one that will
take me away from here more or less. Did Mark tell you of a land deal I
put through?”

“I should think so!”

“Well, I’ve got to build that railroad. Apex will close down when it
finds I won’t let its men work underground. Amalgamated’s next move
will be to bring suit for apex rights, and get out an injunction to
enjoin me from working on that vein until the case is decided. As soon
as I have driven them out now, however, I must get to work on the
railroad--find my engineers--Oh, there are too many details to bother
you with. But it means that I must spend a good deal of time in Butte
until the thing is started----”

“How delighted Ida will be!” interrupted Ora softly. “And that house
will be so comfortable after your cabin.”

For a moment he did not speak. Nor did his face betray him; but she
fancied that his muscles stiffened. He replied suavely: “I should
have gone on to say that it is more likely I shall have to attend to
the matter in Helena. That is the centre of the land interest. It is
doubtful if I could find the sort of men I want in Butte.”

“Have you any other land schemes on hand?”

“Not at present.”

“What does that mean?”

“Well--when I have taken a couple more millions out of this hill
I shall begin to buy land, put it under the ditch, build the short
railroads that may be necessary, and sell to small farmers--in other
words push along the colonisation of this state. I believe you gave me
that idea--the night we talked Butte--the first time, I mean.”

“I thought you had forgotten that night altogether.”

“Forgotten it!” Ora’s heart stood still at the explicit vibration in
his well-ordered voice. She leaned back and closed her eyes. He had
loved her all these months, dreamed of her as she had dreamed of him.
Her first sensation of wonder and delight was succeeded by a faint
disappointment.

She had the instinct of the born huntress, although she was far too
highly civilised to have recognised it before. She wondered if his
capitulation meant her own deliverance, too ignorant in the ways of
love to guess that whether this were a passing or a permanent phase
depended on the man.

While Gregory hurried on to tell her of all he should be able to do
for Montana with the millions at present locked in the vaults of his
hill, she had a full moment of honesty, and confessed that she had come
out here to make Gregory Compton love her. And he did! It was a mighty
personality to conquer; and the victory had been won long since! But
the disappointment passed in a cynical smile. That he had no intention
of declaring himself her lover was as patent as his inhuman power of
self-control. Here were barricades to storm if barricades she wanted?
What difference? And did she?

He sprang to his feet and stood at the foot of the shaft, looking up.

“They’re coming down,” he said.

Joshua Mann emerged a moment later.

“Apex bunch being rounded up to go below,” he said. “Our men are on the
way.”

“Steam on the air line?”

“You bet!”

“Let’s get to work.” He turned to Ora. “Stay here till I come back,” he
said peremptorily. “I can’t take you up in the skip now.”

“I am quite comfortable,” said Ora, coolly. “How many men will come
down?”

“Five.” And he and Mann disappeared into the tunnel.

Ora waited until the other men had descended one by one and run into
the blackness. Then she dislodged one of the candlesticks from the wall
and ran after them. When she reached the fault drift she thrust the
long point of the candlestick into a stull before turning the corner.
Then she crept toward the station, from which she could witness the
punishment about to be inflicted upon the Apex men, whatever it might
be.

There was a glimmer of light in the new drift. Ora saw the men binding
a piece of hose to the same length of pipe. They attached the hose to
the air line and held it just inside the ragged hole some twelve feet
above.

There was a distant murmur of voices overhead and to the right. The
solitary candle was extinguished. The murmur of voices in the drift
which led from Apex shaft along the continuation of the Primo vein grew
louder. Men were laughing. One man was giving orders. It appeared that
they were to let themselves down and go systematically to work on the
Perch vein, which was now driving under the Apex claim.

Ora heard a sharp whispered word: “Now!” and barely recognised
Gregory’s voice. A second later and she was deafened by the roar and
hiss of escaping steam, mingled with shrieks of agony above, and
fiendish cat-calls and jeers below, all expressed in the spectacular
profanity of the mining camp. The episode was over in a moment. The
Apex men tumbled over one another in their anxiety to leave the scene,
and those manifestly disabled--Ora could hear them gasping horribly as
the steam was turned off abruptly--were dragged away. She felt her own
way rapidly along the fault drift, snatched her candlestick from the
wall as she turned the corner, and scampered back to the shaft station.
When the men arrived she was sitting demurely on the box. Gregory
evidently had telephoned from the other station, for the skip came
rattling down just before his appearance at the head of his laughing,
cursing column.

“Did it go off well?” asked Ora.

“Did it?” cried Mann, tossing his cap in the air.

“They’re settled for the moment,” said Gregory. “They’ll come back at
us later with steam on their own air line, and slacked lime; but we’ll
be ready for them. They stand no show.”

Two of the men had been left on watch. Gregory lifted Ora into the
skip. He and Mann stood on the edge. A second more and Ora was
holding her breath as they were hurtled upward at express speed, the
metal car banging from side to side of the shaft. In something under
three-quarters of a minute Gregory helped her to alight in the shaft
house, while the skip descended for the miners.

“Well,” he said, smiling, as she lifted her braid to the top of her
head and wound the veil about it, “have you supped full of sensations
for one day?”

“The last was the worst! And I do mean the skip. Now that we are where
you cannot beat me I will confess that I followed you and saw your neat
little mediæval revenge from the station----”

“Hush!” Gregory glanced about apprehensively, and drew her outside.
“You mustn’t tell anyone else that. You don’t want to be summoned to
the witness stand, I suppose?”

Ora gasped. “I never thought of that.”

“When will women let men do their thinking?” Gregory looked the
primeval male as he scowled down at her. Nor did he mitigate her alarms
with the information that underground battles seldom were continued in
the courts. “Now, I am going to take you to your cottage, and I want
you to stay there until the trouble is over. The men are bound to get
drunk and fight. Better go to Butte----”

“I won’t.”

“Very well, then, stay in your house.”

“And be bored to death? Besides. I need exercise. I’ll roam all over
the place unless you promise to come to supper every night and then
take me for a walk in the woods.”

His eyes flickered. “Perhaps your engineer----”

“He’s a mere child. I hate boys. And I must have exercise.”

He looked at her with apparent stolidity for another moment, but she
knew that he was investigating her expressive orbs. They expressed
nothing that could be construed as flirtation, coquetry, or personal
interest in himself. He saw himself mirrored there merely as the friend
of her husband and the husband of her friend. “Very well,” he said
curtly and swung on his heel. “I suppose I must look out for you. Come
along.”