XIX


The Prom was held not in the School of Mines but in The Coliseum, a
large hall over a saloon and garage, half way between The Hill and The
Flat, requisitioned by all classes when the weather forbade the use
of Columbia Gardens. The walls were covered with the School colours,
copper and green, flags, and college pennants. The ceiling was a
network of electric lights with coloured globes, copper and green,
fluttering paper and sprays of apple blossoms, brought from far! “Cozy
corners” looked like fragments of a lower altitude, and the faithful
palm was on duty everywhere. The orchestra, on a suspended balcony in
the centre of the room, was invisible within the same elaborate scheme
of decoration.

When Ora entered with her husband the Grand March had finished and the
instruments were tuning for a waltz. She saw Ida standing directly
under the orchestra surrounded by several men who patently were
clamouring for dances. Even in that great room full of women dressed
from New York and Paris, Ida looked distinctive and superb. Ora smiled
proudly, as she observed her, quite oblivious that the throng of men
and women and indignant “squabs,” who had been discussing the wife
of Gregory Compton, had transferred their attention to the dazzling
apparition in white. Ida wore her gown of coral silk, whose flimsiness
was concealed under a mist of black shadow lace. The coral beads
clasped her strong white throat and fell to her supple waist. There was
a twist of coral tulle in her black hair, which was arranged in the
rolling fashion of the moment, obeyed by every other woman in the room
save Ora Blake. And her cheeks, her lips, were as coral as the fruit of
the sea. She had powdered her face lightly to preserve its tone through
exercise and heat. All the arrogance of youth and beauty and powerful
magnetism was expressed in the high poise of her head; a faint smile of
triumph curved above her little white teeth; her body was in perfect
repose yet as alert as that of a healthy young cat. The waltz began and
she glided off in the arm of a young mining engineer from the East. She
danced precisely as the best-bred women in the room danced (early in
the evening): ease without abandon, dignity without stiffness.

“Heavens, but the American woman is adaptable!” thought Ora. “I never
realised before exactly what that time-worn platitude meant. Probably
the standards in the Ida set are not so different from ours, after all.
As for looks and carriage she might have three generations behind her.
Is it democracy or the actress instinct of woman--permitted its full
development in this country for the first time in her history?”

This was not entirely a monologue, but addressed for the most part
to Professor Becke, one of the most distinguished instructors of the
School of Mines, and one of the men she liked best in Butte. He was a
tall fair man, with a keen thin fimbriated face, and long fine hands.
Ora made a point of asking him to dine with her once or twice a month.

He led the way to two of the chairs on the side of the hall after she
had announced that she did not intend to dance.

“But this is the first party we have had for weeks,” he said. “They
won’t leave you to me for long.”

“I don’t feel in the mood for dancing. Besides,” she added with a new
daring, “I’m all in white and looking very white once more; I don’t
want to get warm and spoil the effect.”

He stared into her challenging eyes as if he saw her for the first
time. In that room, full of colour and of vivid women and young girls,
she produced an almost disconcerting effect with her statuesque beauty,
her gleaming whiteness, her frail white body so daringly displayed in
its white gown. And, oddly enough, to those staring at her, she made
the other women look not only commonplace but cold.

Ora smiled to herself; she was quite aware of the impression at
work, not only on the scientific brain, but on others more readily
responsive; she had considered the prudence of practising on Butte
before departing for wider fields.

The Professor changed colour, but replied steadily: “Fancy you two
extraordinary creatures loose in Europe! You should take a bodyguard.
I can understand Compton giving his consent, for he is the kind of man
that wouldn’t remember whether his wife were twenty or forty at the end
of his honeymoon, and there can be little between them in any case. But
Blake!”

“Oh, we’ll come home without a scandal,” said Ora lightly. “Ida is the
reverse of what she looks, and I--well, I am the proverbial ‘cold’
American woman--that the European anathematises. Ida, of course, looks
the siren, and I shall have some trouble protecting her, until she
learns how far she can go. But at least I am forewarned.”

“I fancy you will have more trouble protecting yourself!” Professor
Becke’s voice was not as even as usual. His intellect was brilliant,
and illuminating, and never more so than when in the society of this
young woman whom heretofore he had admired merely as a vivacious and
exceptional mind; but, startling as this revelation of subtle and
alluring womanhood was, he remembered that he was no longer young and
that he had an admirable wife with an eagle eye; he had no intention
of scorching his fingers in the attempt to light a flame that would
guide him to the rocks even were he invited to apply the torch. But
he was a man and he sighed a little for his vanished youth. If he had
been twenty years younger he fancied that he would have forgotten his
good lady and risked burning his heart out. He moved his eyes away
deliberately and they rested on Mark Blake, mopping his scarlet face
after a lively waltz. He was a kindly man, but all that was deathlessly
masculine in him grinned with a cynical satisfaction.

“Who is that?” asked Ora abruptly, and forgetting a faint sensation of
pique.

“Ah! Who?”

She indicated a man leaning against one of the doorways, and looking
over the crowd with unseeing eyes. “Heavens! What a jaw! Is he as
‘strong’ as he looks, or is he one of Bismarck’s wooden posts painted
to look like a man of iron?--Why, it’s----”

“That is Gregory Compton, and he is no wooden post, believe me.”

“I haven’t seen him for years. _Can_ any man be as strong as _he_
looks?”

“Probably not. He hasn’t had time to discover his master weaknesses
yet, so I don’t pretend to guess at them myself. At present he is too
absorbed in squeezing our poor brains dry----”

“Doesn’t he ever smile?”

“So rarely that the boys, who have a nickname for all their fellow
students, call him ‘Sunny Jim.’”

“What do you think of his wife?” asked Ora abruptly. She hardly knew
why she asked the question, nor why she felt a secret glow at the
expected answer.

The Professor turned his appraising eye upon the substantial vision
in coral and black that tonight had been pronounced the handsomest
woman in Butte. “There could be no finer example of the obvious. All
her goods are in the front window. There are no surprises behind that
superlative beauty; certainly no revelations.”

“I wonder! Ida is far cleverer than you think, and quite capable of
affording your sex a good deal in the way of surprises, not to say
shocks.”

“Not in the way I mean--not as you will do, worse luck for my helpless
sex. There is no soul there, and, I fancy, little heart. She is the
last woman Gregory Compton should have married.”

“Why?” Ora tried to look bored but polite.

“Oh--whatever she may have for other men she has nothing for him. She
looks the concentrated essence of female--American female--egoism.
Compton needs a woman who would give him companionship when he wanted
it, and, at the same time, be willing in service.”

Ora bristled. “Service? How like a man. Are we still expected to serve
men? I thought the world was moving on.”

Professor Becke, who, like most men married to a domestic
commander-in-chief, was strenuously opposed to giving women any powers
backed up by law, asked with cold reserve: “Are you a suffragette?”

Ora laughed. “Not yet. But I just escaped being born in the Twentieth
Century. I belong to it at all events.”

“So you do, but you never have been in love----” He broke off in
embarrassment; he had forgotten for the moment that this white virginal
creature had been married for six years. She showed no resentment, for
she barely had heard him; she was looking at Gregory Compton again, and
concluding that he might appeal strongly to the supplementary female,
but must antagonise women whose highly specialised intellects, at
home only on the heights of civilisation, had submerged their primal
inheritance.

Professor Becke went on:

“Even a clever woman’s best career is a man. If you women develop
beyond nature that powerful old tyrant will simply snuff you out.”

“Well, man will go too. That may be our final triumph.”

“Atlantis over again! And quite in order that the race should perish
through the excesses of woman. Then Nature, having wiped her slate
clean with a whoop, will begin all over again and precisely where she
did before. No doubt she will permit a few records to survive as a
warning.”

“You may be right--but, although I have an idea I shall one day want to
justify my existence by being of some use, it won’t be because my sex
instinct has got the better of my intelligence. But I refuse to think
of that until I have had a royal good time for a few years.”

“That is your right,” he said impulsively. “You are altogether
exceptional--and you have had six years of Butte! I am glad your mine
has panned out so splendidly. There is quite an excitement in the
Sampling Works----”

“What?” Ora forgot Gregory Compton. “I knew the mine was doing well----”

“Surely you know that your profits in royalties already must be
something over a hundred thousand dollars----” He stopped in confusion.

Ora’s face was radiant and she never had liked Mark as sincerely as
at that moment. “It is just like him! He wanted to wait and give me a
great surprise--my husband, I mean.”

“And I have spoilt it! I am really sorry. Please don’t tell him.”

“I won’t. And I’ll be the most surprised woman in the world when he
takes me to the bank to sign my letter of credit. You needn’t mind.
I’ll have the fun of thinking about it for five months--and rolling it
up in my imagination. Ah!”

“Compton has recognised you, I think.”

Ora had met the long narrow concentrated gaze of her husband’s friend.
She bowed slightly. Compton made a step forward, hesitated, braced
himself, and walked toward her.

“A constitutionally shy man, but a brave one,” said Professor Becke
with a grim smile, as he rose to resign his seat. “A strong magnet has
pulled up many a sinking heart. Good evening, Compton. Glad you honour
our party, even if you don’t dance.”

“I intend to ask Mrs. Blake to dance.” Gregory betrayed nothing of his
inner trepidation although he did not smile. He could always rely upon
the stern mask into which he had trained his visage not to betray him.

Ora, oblivious of her resolution not to dance, rose and placed her
hand on his shoulder, smiling an absent farewell to Professor Becke.
For a moment she forgot her resentful interest in this man in her
astonishment that he danced so well. She had the impression of dancing
with a light supple creature of the woods, one who could be quite
abandoned if he chose, although he held her as if he were embracing
a feather. She wondered if it were his drop of aboriginal blood and
looked up suddenly. To her surprise he was smiling, and his smile so
altered the immobility of his face that she lost her breath.

“I feel as if I were dancing with a snowflake,” was his unexpected
remark.

“You look the last man to pay compliments and murmur sweet nothings.”

“Are you disappointed?”

“Perhaps I am. I rather liked your attitude--expression, rather--of
cool superiority.”

“Why don’t you use the word prig?”

“Oh, no!--Well, perhaps that is what I did mean.”

He stopped short, regardless of the annoyance he caused several
impetuous couples. “If you did I shall leave you right here.”

“I did not. Please go on. Everybody is staring at us. You took me
completely by surprise.”

“I? Why?”

“You are the last man I should expect the usual small talk from.”

“Small talk? Heavens knows I have none of that. Girls used to talk my
head off in self-defence. I merely said what I thought. What did you
expect me to talk about?”

“Oh--mines, I suppose.” Again, to her surprise, his face lit up as if
by an inner and jealously hidden torch. But he said soberly:

“Well, there is no more interesting subject. Never has been since the
world began. Where shall we find a seat?”

The waltz was over. The chairs were filling. Young couples were
flitting toward the embowered corners.

“Let’s go outside,” he said abruptly.

“What? On the street? And nobody goes out of doors from a ballroom in
June.”

“Good reason for going. Come with me.”

He led her to the cloak-room. “Get your wrap,” he said.

Ora frowned, but she asked for her heavy white woollen wrap and put it
on; then automatically followed him down the stairs and into the street.

“Why don’t you get your coat and hat?” she asked, still dazed. “It’s
cold, you know.”

“I never was cold in my life,” he said contemptuously. He hailed a
taxi. “I must go up to the School of Mines, and ask the result of some
assaying,” he added as he almost lifted her in. “Then we can talk up
there. May I smoke?”

“I don’t care what you do.”

He smiled directly into her resentful eyes this time and tucked the
lap-robe about her.