XXV


The County Treasurer, who had just come in, looked blank for a moment,
then greeted his visitor with effusive cordiality.

“Always glad to see you, Mr. Compton. It does a poor clerk’s heart good
just to look at a man who’s such a favourite of fortune. Sit down, sir.”

“I will. I’ve a good deal to say.”

“Staked off the rest of your ranch? It’ll be some little time yet
before you get those patents through you’ve applied for already----”

“What do the taxes foot up on the Oro Fino Primo Mine?”

“Ah--What?” The man’s face turned scarlet, then white. He was a young
man, clerically able, but otherwise insignificant. “Why----” Then he
became voluble.

“The Primo mine, over there near your place? It’s a new claim, isn’t
it? Never heard of it before those fellows from New York sank a
shaft and struck it rich. Why should there be any taxes before the
regular----”

“You know as well as I do that Judge Stratton patented that mine and
did the necessary amount of development work, then found it salted and
abandoned it. That was twenty-eight years ago. He forgot it, and so,
apparently, did this office. It was regarded as an abandoned prospect
hole, if anyone thought about it at all. I haven’t discussed the matter
with Mr. Blake, but assume that he’s merely been waiting for his bill.
Now, for reasons of my own, I’ve telegraphed him to meet me here this
morning, but in case he can’t come I’m prepared to pay the amount
myself. How much?” and he took out his checque book.

The treasurer looked as if the cane seat of his chair had turned to hot
coals. “Really--that is a large order, Mr. Compton. Twenty-eight years.
It will take time to go over the records.”

“I’m prepared to wait all day if necessary.”

“But why this haste?”

“I have my reasons. They don’t concern you in the least. Do they?”

“Why--no--but I am very busy----”

“Then put someone else on the job. I assume that the county is not
averse to raking in a tidy little sum in a hurry.”

“Really----”

Gregory leaned back in his chair and smiled pleasantly.

“You had a telephone from Mr. John Robinson this morning.”

This time the man started visibly, but he made an effort to control
himself. “I have just come in----”

“He telephoned to you last night, did he not? What did he offer you to
permit him to pay those taxes today?”

“I will not be insulted, sir.” The man’s voice was almost a scream.
He heartily wished he had been in training a few years longer, a
graduate of the famous Heinze-Amalgamated orgy of corruption, or of the
Clark-Daly epoch, when nearly every man in office had been bribed or
hoped to be. “I never heard of Mr. Robinson!”

“Of course he reminded you that as the taxes are long delinquent the
county has the right to put the property up at public auction, and that
in any case Mrs. Blake would hardly be given the usual year in which to
redeem it. But why auction when the money is ready to be paid over at
once? How much did he offer you?”

“I repeat----”

“I think I can guess. It was five thousand dollars. I’ll make it ten.
Get to work.”

The man, in whom excitement had destroyed his appetite for breakfast,
and who had started out in life with the usual negative ideals of
honesty, burst into tears. “My God!” he sobbed. “I’ve heard of the
third degree. Your eyes bore a hole through one. They hurt, I say. To
think that you should come in here and accuse me of taking bribes.”

“Oh, hell, cut it out. Montana may be a great state, but she has her
rotten spot like any other. She’s been so debauched the last twenty
years by open bribery that I doubt if you could lay your hand on a
hundred men in her that haven’t had a roll anywhere from five hundred
to twenty thousand dollars passed to them, and pocketed it. Estimable
citizens, too, but a man never knows his weak spot until he has a wad
of easy money thrust under his nose--or flung over his transom. You are
no worse than the rest. Do you take my offer?”

The County Treasurer recovered himself with amazing alacrity. Ten
thousand dollars in a lump never had haunted his wildest dreams.

“All right, sir. It’s a bargain. But I want bills. No checks for me.”

“I congratulate you on your foresight! But there have been times in
this state when checque books were not opened for months. You shall
have it in bills. Where are the records?”

“In the vault there.”

“I’ll sit here. If you attempt to leave the room to go to a telephone
I’ll drag you out on the Court House steps and tell the story to the
town. Now get to work.”

“I’ll keep my word, sir, and I know you’ll keep yours.” He went into
the vault and appeared later trundling out a pile of records, then sat
down at a table and concentrated his mind as earnestly as if corruption
had never blighted it. Gregory watched him until Mark entered. Then the
two men went out into the corridor, standing where they could see the
table. Gregory recounted his interview with Mr. John Robinson, and the
present sequel.

Mark listened with his mouth open, an expression of profound chagrin
loosening the muscles of his cheerful healthy shrewd face.

“By George!” he cried. “And to think that was the one thing I never
thought of. Of course I knew about the delinquent taxes, and intended
to pay them when I was good and ready; but what’s the use of forking
over till you have to? But not to have thought of this! And I pride
myself upon sleeping with one eye open--never was caught napping yet!”
And for five minutes he exploited his vocabulary of profanity, heaping
each epithet upon his own humiliated head.

Gregory laughed. “Merely another proof that two heads are better than
one. Do you stand for the ten thousand? If not I’ll pay half.”

“I’d pay fifty----”

“I’ll pay half,” said Gregory definitely. “It means as much to me as to
you.”

“All right. Jimminy, but they’re clever!” He was calmer and his astute
legal brain was moved to admiration. “But you are cleverer. I’ve always
sworn by you. They’ll get a jolt all right. How did you catch on,
anyhow?”

“I fancy I got a wireless. The other man was thinking hard and so was
I--had practically nothing else in our minds. Those things will be
better explained some day. Perhaps it was merely a good guess.”

“You hit the nail on the head all right. I’ll have a letter to write to
Ora next Sunday! She’s had a narrow squeak, and she shall know whom to
thank for it.”

“Oh, cut that out.”

Gregory went to the bank and drew the ten thousand dollars, while
Mark kept watch. When the bill was finally made out, Mark examined it
critically, and then gave his personal checque. Three months later the
County Treasurer resigned his office on the ground of ill health and
bought an orange grove in Southern California. There he and his growing
family enjoy a respected, prosperous, bucolic life.