IX


Butte, “the richest hill in the world” (known at a period when less
famous for metals and morals as “Perch of the Devil”), is a long
scraggy ridge of granite and red and grey dirt rising abruptly out of
a stony uneven plain high in the Rocky Mountains. The city is scooped
out of its south slope, and overflows upon The Flat. Big Butte, an
equally abrupt protuberance, but higher, steeper, more symmetrical,
stands close beside the treasure vault, but with the aloof and somewhat
cynical air of even the apocryphal volcano. On all sides the sterile
valley heaves away as if abruptly arrested in a throe of the monstrous
convulsion that begat it; but pressing close, cutting the thin
brilliant air with its icy peaks, is an irregular and nearly circular
chain of mountains, unbroken white in winter, white on the blue
enamelled slopes in summer.

For nearly half the year the whole scene is white, with not a tree,
nor, beyond the straggling town itself, a house to break its frozen
beauty. It is only when the warm Chinook wind roars in from the west
and melts the snow much as lightning strikes, or when Summer herself
has come, that you realize the appalling surface barrenness of this
region devastated for many years by the sulphur and arsenic fumes of
ore roasted in the open or belching from the smelters. They ate up
the vegetation, and the melting snows and heavy June rains washed the
weakened earth from the bones of valley and mountain, leaving both as
stark as they must have been when the earth ceased to rock and began to
cool. Since the smelters have gone to Anaconda, patches of green, of a
sad and timid tenderness, like the smile of a child too long neglected,
have appeared between the sickly grey boulders of the foothills, and,
in Butte, lawns as large as a tablecloth have been cultivated. Anaconda
Hill at the precipitous eastern end of the city, with its tangled mass
of smokestacks, gallows-frames, shabby grey buildings, trestles, looks
like a gigantic shipwreck, but is merely the portal to the precious
ore bodies of the mines whose shafts, levels, and cross-cuts to the
depth of three thousand feet and more, pierce and ramify under city
and valley. These hideous buildings through which so many hundreds of
millions have passed, irrupt into the very back yards of some of the
homes, built too far east (and before mere gold and silver gave place
to copper); but the town improves as it leaps westward. The big severe
solid buildings to be found in every modern city sure of its stability
crowd the tumble-down wood structures of a day when no man looked upon
Butte as aught but a camp. And although the streets are vociferously
cobbled, the pavements are civilised here and there.

Farther west the houses of the residence section grow more and more
imposing, coinciding with the sense of Butte’s inevitableness. On the
high western rim of the city (which exteriorly has as many ups and
downs as the story of its vitals) stands the red School of Mines. It
has a permanent expression of surprise, natural to a bit of Italian
renaissance looking down upon Butte.

Some of the homes, particularly those of light pressed brick, and one
that looks like the northeast corner of the upper story of a robber
stronghold of the middle ages, are models of taste and not too modest
symbols of wealth; but north and south and east and west are the snow
wastes in winter and the red or grey untidy desert of sand and rock in
summer.

But if Butte is the ugliest city in the United States, she knows
how to make amends. She is alive to her finger-tips. Her streets,
her fine shops, her hotels, her great office buildings, are always
swarming and animated. At no time, not even in the devitalised hours
that precede the dawn, does she sink into that peace which even a
metropolis welcomes. She has the jubilant expression of one who coins
the very air, the thin, sparkling, nervous air, into shining dollars,
and, confident in the inexhaustible riches beneath her feet, knows
that she shall go on coining them forever. Even the squads of miners,
always, owing to the three shifts, to be seen on the street corners,
look satisfied and are invariably well-dressed. Not only do these
mines with their high wages and reasonable hours draw the best class
of workingmen, but there are many college men in them, many more
graduates from the High Schools of Montana. The “Bohunks,” or “dark
men,” an inferior class of Southern Europeans, who live like pigs and
send their wages home, rarely if ever are seen in these groups.

And if Butte be ugly, hopelessly, uncompromisingly ugly, her
compensation is akin to that of many an heiress: she never forgets
that she is the richest hill in the world. Even the hard grip of the
most unassailable trust in America, which has absorbed almost as much
of Montana’s surface as of its hidden treasure, does not interfere
with her prosperity or supreme complacency. And although she has
her pestilential politicians, her grafters and crooks, and is so
tyrannically unionized that the workingman groans under the yoke of his
brother and forgets to curse the trust, yet ability and talent make
good as always; and in that electrified city of permanent prosperity
there is a peculiar condition that offsets its evils: it is a city of
sudden and frequent vacancies. New York, Europe, above all, California,
swarm with former Montanans, particularly of Butte, who have coppered
their nests, and transplanted them with a still higher sense of
achievement.

Ora was thinking of Butte and the world beyond Butte, as she splashed
along through the suddenly melted snow toward her home on the West
Side. The Chinook, loud herald from Japan, had swept down like an army
in the night and turned the crisp white streets to rivers of mud. But
Ora wore stout walking boots, and her short skirt, cut by a master
hand, was wide enough to permit the impatient stride she never had
been able to modify in spite of her philosophy and the altitude. She
walked several miles a day and in all weathers short of a blizzard; but
not until the past few weeks with the admission that her increasing
restlessness, her longing for Europe, was growing out of bonds. She
wondered today if it were Europe she wanted, or merely a change.

She had, of course, no money of her own, and never had ceased to be
grateful that her husband’s prompt and generous allowance made it
unnecessary to ask alms of him. Three times since her marriage he had
suddenly presented her with a check for several hundred dollars and
told her to “give her nerves a chance” either down “on the coast,”
or in New York. She had always fled to New York, remained a month
or six weeks, gone day and night to opera, theatre, concerts, art
exhibitions, not forgetting her tailor and dressmaker; returning to
Butte as refreshed as if she had taken her heart and nerves, overworked
by the altitude, down to the poppy fields of Southern California.

Her vacations and her husband’s never coincided. Mark always departed
at a moment’s notice for Chicago or New York, alleging pressing
business. He returned, after equally pressing delays, well, complacent,
slightly apologetic.

Ora knew that she had but to ask permission to spend the rest of
the winter in New York, for not only was Mark the most indulgent of
husbands, but he was proud of his wife’s connections in the American
Mecca, not unwilling to read references in the Butte newspapers to her
sojourn among them. The “best people” of these Western towns rarely
have either friends or relatives in the great cities of the East. The
hardy pioneer is not recruited from the aristocracies of the world, and
the dynamic men and women that have made the West what it is have the
blood of the old pioneers in them.

Ora was one of the few exceptions. Her father had been the last of a
distinguished line of jurists unbroken since Jonathan Stratton went
down with Alexander Hamilton in the death struggle between the Federal
and the new Republican party. Ora’s mother, one of New York’s imported
beauties for a season, who had languished theretofore on the remnants
of a Louisiana plantation, impecunious and ambitious, but inexperienced
and superficially imaginative, married the handsome and brilliant
lawyer for love, conceiving that it would be romantic to spend a few
years in a mining camp, where she, indubitably, would be its dominant
lady. Butte did not come up to her ideas of romance. Nor had she found
it possible to dislodge the passively determined women with the pioneer
blood in their veins. The fumes afflicted her delicate lungs, the
altitude her far more delicate nerves. Judge Stratton deposited her in
the drawing-room of an eastern bound train with increasing relish. Had
it not been for his little girl he would have bade her upon the second
or third of these migrations to establish herself in Paris and return
no more.

During these long pilgrimages Ora, even while attending school in New
York, Paris, Berlin, Rome, Vevey, had seen something of society, for
Mrs. Stratton was ever surrounded by it, and did not approve of the
effect of boarding school diet on the complexion. But the ardours of
her mind, encouraged always by her father, who never was too busy to
write to her, had made her indifferent to the advantages prized by Mrs.
Stratton.

Today she was conscious of a keen rebellious desire for something more
frivolous, light, exciting, than had entered her life for many a year.
There can be little variety and no surprises in the social life of a
small community--for even scandal and divorce grow monotonous--and
although she could always enjoy an hour’s intellectual companionship
with the professors of the School of Mines, whenever it pleased her
to summon them, Ora, for the first time in her twenty-six years, had
drifted into a condition of mind where intellectual revels made no
appeal to her whatever.

She had wondered before this if her life would have been purely mental
had her obligations been different, but had dismissed the thought as
not only dangerous but ungrateful. She had reason to go on her knees
to her intellect, its ambitions and its furniture, for without it life
would have been insupportable. She ordered her quickening ego back
to the rear, or the depths, or wherever it bided its time, none too
amenable; she was only beginning to guess the proportions it might
assume if encouraged; the vague phantoms floating across her mind,
will-o’-the-wisps in a fog bank, frightened her. Several months since
she had set her lips, and her mind the task of acquiring the Russian
language. It had always been her experience that nothing compared with
a new language as a mental usurper.

She had entered into a deliberate partnership with a man who protected
and supported her, and she would keep the letter, far as its spirit
might be beyond the reach of her will. Even were she to become
financially independent, it was doubtful if she would leave him for
a long period; and for New York and its social diversions she cared
not at all. What she wanted was adventure--she stumbled on the word,
and stopped with a gasp. Adventure. For the first time she wished she
were a man. She would pack two mules with a prospector’s outfit and
disappear into the mountains.

She swung her mind to the Russian grammar, enough to impale it in
the death agony; but when she had entered her home, and, after a
visit to her leisurely cook, who was a unionized socialist, ascended
to her bedroom and stood before her mirror, she decided that it was
her singular interview with the wife of Gregory Compton that had
thrown her mind off its delicate balance. She recalled that Mrs.
Compton--certainly an interesting creature in spite of her appalling
commonness--had told her flagrantly that she was young, pretty, and
attractive to men, even as are young and pretty women without too much
brains. The compliment--or was it the suggestion?--had thrilled her,
and it thrilled her again. Men sometimes had tried to make love to
her, but she had ascribed such charm as she appeared to possess to the
automatically vibrating magnet of youth; and although she had never
been above a passing flirtation, either in her mother’s salon or in
Butte, she merely had been bored if the party of the other part had
taken his courage in his hands on the morrow. Scruples did not trouble
her. The American woman, she would have reasoned, is traditionally
“cold.” American men, brought up on her code of ethics, are able to
take care of themselves.

Had she been superficial in her conclusions? Could she attract men
more potently than by a merely girlish charm and a vivacious mind? Her
memory ran rapidly over the functions of the winter, particularly the
dinners and dances. She could not recall a passing conquest. She was
angry to feel herself shiver, but she jerked off her hat, and the pins
out of her fine abundant hair. She was twenty-six. Had she gone off?
Faded? She never had been called a beauty, never had had the vanity
to think herself a beauty, but she remembered that sometimes in an
animated company she had glanced into the passing mirror and thought
herself quite pretty, with her pink cheeks and sparkling eyes. But
normally she was too washed-out for beauty, however good her features
might be, and of course she had no figure at all. She dressed well from
force of habit, and she had the carriage at least to set off smartly
cut garments, but as much might be said of a dressmaker’s “form.”

And her skin was sallow and sunburned and weather-beaten and dry, as
any neglected skin in a high altitude is sure to be. Once it had been
as white as her native snows. Her hair, also the victim of the high
dry air, and exposed to the elements for hours together, was more
colourless than Nature had made it--dull--dead. She held out a strand
in dismay, remembering how her _cendré_ hair had been admired in Paris;
then with a sudden sense of relief (it escaped from the cellar where
her ego was immured on bread and water) she informed herself that it
was her duty to invoke the services of Miss Ruby Miller. No woman with
proper pride--or self-respect--would let her skin go to pot, no, not
at any age; certainly not at twenty-six. She recalled an impulsive
remark of Miss Miller’s a few months since when arranging her hair for
a fancy-dress ball, and gave another sigh--of hope.

So does Nature avenge herself.