VI


Two days later Gregory received the following note from his wife:

  DEAR GREGORY:

  Ora is here, and before going out to the mine has promised to help
  me through the ordeal of my first big dinner. Entertaining goes with
  this house, and although I am beginning somewhat sooner, perhaps,
  than is necessary, I have my reasons. I have asked twenty-four
  people, the most important of the older and the younger married
  sets. The dinner is to be at eight o’clock Tuesday. I want you to
  come. Yow have been very generous, but there is one thing more that
  you can do for me and I feel that I have the right to demand it.
  If you no longer care for me, that is something I cannot help; nor
  you either for that matter. But so far as the world knows, I am
  your wife, and if we are never seen together there is bound to be
  disagreeable gossip. I don’t want to be gossipped about. It is vulgar
  and it complicates life. The Butte women I most wanted to know are
  all right, but the town has the usual allowance of fools and scandal
  mongers. By showing yourself at my first dinner in your own house
  you will muzzle them. You can arrive in time for dinner and take a
  late train back to Pony, if there is one. But please come. I am sure
  if you think it over you will admit that I am merely proving my new
  knowledge of the world in asking for your formal protection.

                                                                    IDA.

Gregory read this note hastily when he found it in his morning mail-bag
in company with many business letters, to which he also gave scant
attention: he was in haste to go underground. There was still no sign
of the lost vein, and nineteen days of the three weeks’ limit he had
set himself were gone. But they broke into it that same afternoon. He
barely left the mine until the following morning, but he finally sought
his cabin and bed satisfied that the recovered vein of copper pyrite
was, like the original, six feet thick and as rich in values. When he
awoke he remembered Ida’s note, and although it had provoked a frown of
annoyance when he read it, his spirits were now so ebullient that he
not only admitted the justice of her demand, but would have granted
almost anyone a reasonable request.

Moreover, as he reread the note, its restraint and dignity struck
him forcibly, as well as its remote likeness to the Ida Hook he had
wooed in Nine Mile Cañon. Certainly she had made the most of her
opportunities!

And apparently she had recovered from her first disappointment, or
pique--if, indeed, she had felt either--and he assumed that the
last year, crowded with exceptional experiences, had made her over
into something like a woman of the world. No doubt among her many
accomplishments she had acquired self-control. (That she might also
have acquired finesse did not occur to him.) He dismissed the fear
that she would make a scene--and himself thoroughly uncomfortable. On
the whole it would be interesting to see Ida as a bird of paradise.
He remembered her in shirtwaists and serviceable skirts, and recalled
that he had sometimes thought it a pity she should not have the plumage
worthy of her beauty and style.

And if the fates had willed that he must meet Ora Blake again he
preferred that the first interview should be in public.

He rang up Pony and in the course of half an hour was connected with
Butte.

“Hello!” he said cordially, as he heard his wife’s voice. “Got your
letter, but couldn’t find time to answer before. I’ll come to the
dinner with pleasure.”

“Oh, I am so glad.” Ida’s tones were crisp and cool. There was none of
the husky warmth that Gregory suddenly remembered; nor any of the old
common inflection. “Are your evening togs at Mark’s?”

“Yes, will you send for them?”

“I’ll have everything here in one of the spare rooms. The maid will
show you up if you are late. It takes me hours to dress.”

“All right. Say--Ida--I wish you’d persuade Mrs. Blake to give up that
idea of coming out here. It won’t work. She’ll only be in the way of
the men, and if there was a big row on would be one more responsibility
for her manager. I suppose she knows I’ve opened up her mine. Besides,
it’s no place for a woman anyhow. There are only a few women--miners’
wives--in my camp; none in the others.”

“I’ve told her all that. But--well--you don’t know Ora.
Gambling--taking long chances--is in her blood, I guess. You should
have seen her at Monte Carlo. You must take in Mrs. Cameron, but I am
putting Ora on your left as it is time you two got acquainted. Try to
dissuade her. I want her to stay here with me.”

“I’ll do my best. How are you getting on? Butte still panning out?”

“I adore Butte and find nothing to change. It’s too wonderful--to have
all your old dreams come true like this! I hope your mine is behaving.
I heard a rumour the other day that you had lost your vein----”

“Just found it again!”

Ida noted the exultant ring of his voice, and was about to laugh when
she changed her tactics swiftly. “Good! I know just how fine you
feel--and that it wasn’t the loss of money that worried you either.
Well, the dinner will be a sort of celebration. Good-bye.”

“Good-bye.” There was a faint accent of surprise in Gregory’s voice.
Ida smiled and returned to her interrupted toilette.

“Just let me get a good chance at him once more,” she thought. “I’ll be
eating copper before I get through, but I don’t know him or his sex if
he won’t be nibbling off the same chunk.”