XII


There had been a good deal of haggling over the lease of the Oro Fino
Primo mine, the engineers demanding a three years’ lease and bond,
proposing to purchase it at the end of that period for fifty thousand
dollars. Nor were they willing to pay more than ten per cent. in
royalty, displaying the assay report on the ore and arguing that after
the necessary outlay on development work, the ore body might be too
small to repay them.

Mark, however, was determined not to close with them until he had
visited the claim with Gregory Compton, and this proved to be
impossible for several weeks. The engineers, unable to proceed, had
dismissed their men. They threatened to withdraw their offer and look
for another abandoned property. Mark told them to go ahead, and they
remained in Butte.

In the course of a month Mark and Gregory were both free on a Sunday.
They took a train for Pony, hired a rig and drove over to the Stratton
claim, dignified by the name of mine.

The claim was on a small tableland between Gregory’s own hill, which
terminated just beyond the borders of his ranch, and another slope
covered with pines and firs. The engineers had put up a windlass,
retimbered the shaft, sunk it twenty feet lower, and added a pile of
dirty looking ore to the original half-obliterated heap about the
collar of the shaft.

Gregory picked up half a dozen pieces of various sizes and examined
them. “Their assay was about right, I should think,” he said. “Looks
like good low grade ore, but not too good. It will do no harm to assay
it myself, however,” and he dropped the sample into the pocket of
his coat. Suddenly he gave a startled exclamation, and Mark saw his
nostrils dilate, his nose almost point, as he darted forward and kicked
aside a heap of loosely piled quartz. Then he knelt down and lifted
out several lumps of greyish-black ore.

“What is it?” asked Mark curiously, and feeling something of the
excitement of the hunter whose gun is trained on a bear. “D’you mean
they’ve found copper glance?”

“At a depth of sixty feet? Not exactly. This is a basic igneous rock
called pyroxenite, that may not be rich in gold but is more than likely
to be--particularly as our friends have hidden it so carefully and said
nothing about it. It may assay anywhere from ten dollars a ton to five
hundred. I’m going down.”

The shaft was inclined, four by eight, and timbered with lagging.
Gregory lit the candle he had brought and descended the ladder. He
remained below about ten minutes; when he returned to the surface he
was excited and triumphant.

“They’ve begun to drift on the vein,” he announced. “They’ve gone about
three feet--it must have been then they learned the history of the
claim. It’s pyroxenite all right, every inch of it.”

“Well, damn them!” said Mark.

“They can’t plead that they didn’t recognise the ore, uncommon as it
is, because they began to drift the moment they struck the vein. It
dips toward the ranch,” he added abruptly.

Mark whistled. “It’s pretty close. That would be a kettle of fish--if
it apexed on your land! Lawsuit. Friendship of a lifetime broken. The
beautiful Mrs. Mark Blake brings suit against the now famous Gregory
Compton----”

“Oh, nonsense!” said Gregory shortly. But he was disturbed nevertheless.

“But there’s no nonsense in the idea that your own ore bodies may be
just over the border. Why don’t you sink a shaft, just for nuts.”

Gregory, who was still excited, felt an impulse to confide his
discovery to his friend. But his natural secretiveness overcame him and
he turned abruptly away. “When I have finished at the School,” he said,
“no doubt I’ll begin gophering again, but not before. What are you
going to do about this? Let them have it?”

“I’ll let them have a piece of my mind first. What do you
advise?--that I work the mine, myself? I could easily form a company if
the ore is as rich as you think.”

“I wouldn’t take the chances. Lease the claim to them for a year.
They’ll take it for that time with all this ore in sight. If they’ve
hit a large chamber they’ll soon be netting several thousand dollars a
day. If it’s only a pocket, let them find it out. At the end of a year
you’ll know a good deal more about the mine than you do now. But keep
an eye on them so that they don’t gouge, and make them pay you twenty
per cent. royalty.”

“They’ll pay it through the nose,” said Mark emphatically.

Gregory laughed. “You feel as virtuously indignant as if you had never
tried to do anybody yourself. It’s do or be done out West as well as
back East, and precious few mines have a clean history. Marcus Daly
never would have got the best part of Butte Hill if he hadn’t kept his
mouth shut.”

“It isn’t that I’m so virtuous,” said Mark ingenuously, “but I don’t
like the idea that anybody so nearly got the best of me. And just look
at the way they covered it up.”

Gregory had kicked aside the greater part of a pile of grey ore, and
revealed quite a hillock of the pyroxenite. He put several pieces in
his pocket, discarding the first specimens. “I’ll get to work on this
tonight,” he said, “and let you know first thing in the morning. But
I’m willing to wager that it runs from sixty to a hundred dollars a
ton.”

“And not a fleck of gold to be seen!” Mark, who, like all intelligent
men of mining localities, had some knowledge of ores, examined the dark
rock attentively. “They’re some geologists,” he added with unwilling
admiration. “This would fool any ordinary mining engineer. Say!” he
cried, “I’ll not tell Ora until she’s ready to leave--she’s figuring on
going to Europe in the fall. It will be the surprise of her life, for
I led her to think she’d get only a hundred or so a month. Don’t say a
word about it to Ida.”

Gregory turned away to hide a curl of his lip. “I suppose we’d better
go over and see Oakley, as we’re so close,” he said. “He’ll probably
talk for an hour on his hobby, but any knowledge comes in useful to a
lawyer.”

“What’s he done.”

“He figured out that Iowa and the Dakotas and Kansas were likely to
have a drought next year, so he will sow about five hundred acres with
flax in May. He has already put in about three hundred acres of winter
wheat. The bottoms are reserved for alfalfa. He raises the capital and
gets half profits. If it turns out as he expects he’ll have something
at the end of a year to live on besides enthusiasm for intensive
farming.”

       *       *       *       *       *

They were driving toward Pony two hours later when Gregory said
abruptly, “I’m glad that your wife and mine have taken to each other.
It is a great thing for Ida. The improvement is wonderful.” He forebore
to add, even to the man who had known his wife since childhood, “I
don’t see what Mrs. Blake gets out it,” but possibly the irrepressible
thought flew into Mark’s mind, for he replied promptly:

“It’s great for Ora. She’s tired of everybody else here; tired of so
much reading too. I’ve seen that for some time, though I haven’t let
on. A new interest was just what she wanted. Every clever woman has
a touch of the school ma’am in her, and no one can deny that Ida’s
refreshing. To Ora she’s almost a novelty. I think she rather hates to
make her over, but she’s working on her as hard as I work on a case.
Ora’s the thorough sort. What she does is done with all her might and
main. Otherwise she don’t do it at all. She’s equally accomplished at
that!”

He decided that this was the propitious moment; Gregory was in an
uncommonly melting mood, for him. “Say!” he continued, “Ora and I have
put up a little job on you. I’ve told her to take her new money and go
to Europe for six months or so--By James, she shall go, even if this
thing hangs fire and I have to sell some stock. It’s over six years
since she’s seen Europe, and I guess she pines for it all right. Well,
she wants to take Ida.”

Gregory demanded with unexpected promptness, “How much would it cost?”

“Oh, about a hundred to New York and a hundred and fifty over,” said
Mark vaguely. “Of course when two are together it costs less. And in
Europe distances are short. Ora says she shall go to _pensions_ instead
of hotels, if only because they would be two young women alone; and
they cost much less. They can also travel second-class, and third in
Germany and Switzerland. Ora says she and her friends always did it in
summer because it was cooler and more interesting. She’s sent for a lot
of Baedekers, is going to make a close estimate, then double it.”

“One of my aunts died the other day and left me a thousand dollars; she
had no family. Ida can have it. Of course I could send her more if she
needed it, but she’s clever with money.”

“That will do it.” (He knew that if it did not Ora, who would pay the
bills, would manage to hoodwink Ida.) “And you must live with me. It’ll
be fine. Bachelor’s Hall. We’ll do as we damn please.”

Gregory shook hands with him, his strong hard face illuminated with
the infrequent smile that gave it something of a sweet woman’s charm.
“Thanks, old man,” he said fervently. “Sounds good!”