XVII


There was a knock on the front door. Ida, smoothing her hair, hastened
to open it, glad of diversion. Ora stood there. For a moment the girls
looked hard at each other, then burst into laughter.

“What’s up?” asked Ida. “You look----”

“My dear, it is I who should ask? Your face is crimson; you look as if
you had just given someone a beating, and I met poor little Whalen,
dusty, dishevelled, growling like a mad dog--he didn’t know me.”

“Well, I guess he won’t know himself for a while,” said Ida drily,
leading the way into the parlour. “When he comes to he’ll have his
work cut out to climb back to his little two-cent pedestal and fit on
his battered halo.” She related the incident. “What do you know about
that?” she demanded in conclusion. “Wouldn’t it come and get you?”

“I am afraid you have made an enemy. It is always best to let them
down gently, save their pride--and--ah!--it isn’t customary to throw
gentlemen out of the window!”

“Gentlemen!” snorted Ida. “He’s no gentleman. He not only kissed
me with his horrid front teeth, but he insinuated that I was just
languishing for him, the----” Once more Ida’s feelings overflowed in
language not intended for print. “It made me so mad I’d have lammed him
with the umbrella if we’d been in the hall.”

“Ida,” asked Ora abruptly, “would you have minded so much if he had
been good-looking and attractive?”

“Well--perhaps--I guess in that case I’d simply have smacked him and
let him get out quick by the front door. But I don’t want any man
touching me. I’m a married woman.”

“But if you flirt and lead them on----”

“You said once yourself that American men understood the game and knew
how to take their medicine.”

“I also said that they can fall more tiresomely in love than any other
men. Of course the Whalens don’t count. But do you intend to go on
making men fall in love with you and throwing them--metaphorically--out
of the window?”

“Much chance I’ll get.”

“You’ll find plenty of chances in Europe. You are a remarkably
beautiful woman. And Europeans take what we call flirting for shameless
encouragement.”

“Well, I guess I’ll be getting experience of the world all right. And
the Lord knows I’d like to be admired by men who have seen something. I
can take care of myself, and Greg don’t need to worry.”

“I’ve no doubt of that. Of course you are awfully fond of Mr. Compton,
aren’t you?” Ora spoke somewhat wistfully.

“Oh, yes; fond enough, fonder than a good many wives, I guess, for he’s
kind and pleasant, and no earthly trouble about the house. But when a
woman marries she gets a kid right there at the altar, and he’s her
biggest kid till his false teeth drop out on his death-bed, and his
great-grandchildren are feeding him through a tube. I don’t want any of
the other sort of kids, and I guess I’m not what you call the maternal
woman, but the Lord knows I’m a mother to Greg and a good one. I’d like
to know what he’d do without me--that’s the only reason I hate leaving.
He never thinks of changing his shoes when they’re wet, and half the
time wouldn’t eat anything but his book if I didn’t put the stuff right
in front of him.”

“Mark knows him almost as well as you do, and will look after him. My
maid, who is practically my housekeeper, and an old family servant,
will also keep a maternal eye on him.”

“He keeps himself tidy,” conceded Ida handsomely. “Wants clean things
every day, but never knows where to find them. He’ll wander out into
the kitchen where I’m cooking breakfast and ask where his socks are,
and they always in the same drawer.”

“I fancy you’ve spoiled him.”

“Not I. I don’t hold with spoiling men. They’re born spoiled anyhow.
I found Greg walking round in a dream when I married, and a pile of
socks as high as the door knob he’d thrown away because they’d holes in
them so tiny you could hardly see them. I darned every one, you bet,
and he’s wearing them now, though he don’t know it. He’s like that, as
dainty as a cat, and as helpless as a blind kitten. I am a wife and I
know my duty,” concluded Ida virtuously.

“I certainly shall give Custer minute directions. I can’t have you
worrying.”

“I’ll not worry, once I’m started. Don’t you fret! But what’s the
matter with you, Ora? You look kinder excited, and kinder--well,
harassed. How’s that out of the new pocket dictionary I’ve set up in my
head?”

“I’ll soon have to look to my own vocabulary. Oh--I----”

“Something’s up. Spit it out. It’ll do you good.”

“Dear Ida! If you must use slang, do confine yourself to that which has
passed through the mint of polite society. There is an abundance to
choose from!”

“Don’t you worry; I won’t disgrace you. But I must let out a tuck
occasionally when we’re alone. Greg wouldn’t let me go to any of the
Club dances, and I scarcely ever see Ruby or Pearl, they’re so busy--to
say nothing of myself!”

“Very well,” said Ora, laughing. “Let me be your safety valve, by all
means.”

“Fire away.”

“Oh--how am I to tell you--I scarcely know, myself----”

“I guess you’re waking up. Ruby, who knows human nature like a book----”

Ora half rose. “Have you been talking me over with Miss Miller?” she
asked haughtily.

“Not much. Hardly seen her since we met. But you interest Butte, you
know. I guess they talk you over good and plenty. It was only a few
days before you called that the Miller girls visited with me all day,
and they talked a lot about you. Ruby said that if you’d come to out of
the sleeping beauty stage, you’d make things hum, and that her fingers
just itched to get at your skin and hair.”

“She said that to me once; and I don’t mind telling you that I called
her in some time ago.”

“Oh, I’m not a bat. I’ve seen you looking prettier every day, and
there’s only one way to do it, when you’ve let yourself go. I’ve had
the benefit of Ruby’s advice for years, and I don’t propose to let
myself go, not for a minute.”

“Right you are. And do live your life normally from day to day,
developing normally. The awakening process, when the Nature that
made you is no longer content to be a mere footstool for the mind,
is almost as painful as coming to after drowning. I suddenly have
become conscious of myself, as it were; I am interested in many more
things--personal things--I seem to want far more of life than I did a
few months ago----”

“In other words, you don’t know where you’re at.”

Ora laughed merrily. “My present condition could not be stated more
patly!”

“Ora, I don’t want to pry into your confidence, and you’re not one to
give much of that anyhow, but everybody in Butte knows that you’re not
in love with Mark, and never were, nice as you treat him--only because
you couldn’t be anything but a lady if you tried. Mrs. O’Neil, one day
when she was having a massage, told Ruby all about your marriage. She
said you were the most bewildered young thing she ever saw, and that
Mark snapped you up before another young man could get a look at you.
Now, I’ve known Mark all my life--he beaued my sister who died, for a
year or two, and his mother’s cottage was just up the hill anyhow; and
although he’s a good chap and a born hustler, and bound to get rich,
he’s not the sort of man women fall in love with. You wouldn’t have
fallen in love with him, if he’d been born a millionaire, and travelled
and got Butte out of his system. And if your father had left you well
off, you wouldn’t have looked at him. There’s men, bad and good--that’s
to say, better--that women fall in love with, and there’s men bad and
good that they don’t, not in a thousand years. Poor old Mark’s a Don’t
all right. You ain’t angry at my saying all this, but Mark was like my
own brother for years?”

“Oh, no, I am not angry. You are far too matter-of-fact. You might be
discussing different grades of ore!”

“Well, that’s about it, and the poor ore can’t help itself, any more
than the slag and gangue can, and Mark’s not either of those, you bet.
He’s good metal, all right, only he didn’t come out of the Anaconda
mine--What have you turned so red about? My! But you do blush easy!”

“It’s this--do you despise me--do you think I did wrong--Oh, I mean I
have quite suddenly realised that I never should have married any man
for so contemptible a reason. I should have gone to work----”

“Work? You?”

“Why not? Many a delicately nurtured woman has earned her bread.”

“The more fool she if she could get a man to earn it for her. That’s
what they’re for. The Lord knows they pride themselves on the way they
do it, being the stronger sex, and a lot more words. I guess I’d have
married before Greg turned up if I’d met a man I was sure was going to
make something of himself. You did just right to take a good husband
and take him quick when you found yourself in a hole.”

“Yes--but----” Her blush deepened. “You see--” Ora never had had an
intimate confidant. It was doubtful if she ever would have; not, at all
events, a woman. But Ida, as she herself would have expressed it, could
always see through a stone wall when there was a crack in it.

“Oh, shucks!” she said. “Don’t let that worry you. If you don’t feel
that way first you do last, I guess. Most of us are bored to death,
but women have stood it for a few thousand years, and I guess they can
stand it for a few thousand more. We all of us have to pay high for
anything we want. That’s about the size of it. Forget it.”

“Thanks, dear, you console me.” Ora smiled with closed eyes, but she
was thrilled with a sudden inexplicable longing; like other of her
recent sensations, it puzzled and alarmed her.

“Ora!” exclaimed Ida suddenly. “There’s one thing that’s just as sure
as death and taxes; and knowing men and knowing life don’t help women
one little bit. It’s this: A woman’s got to have her love affair sooner
or later. If she marries for love she’s pretty safe, for ten or fifteen
years, anyhow. But if she doesn’t, well, she’ll get it in the neck
sooner or later--and it’ll be about the time she begins to sit up and
take notice. She’s a regular magnet then, too. So watch out.”

Ora opened her eyes. They looked like steel. “I have never given a
thought to love. There is nothing I want less. I shall continue to
make Mark as good a wife as I know how to be----”

“Oh, I’m not saying you’ll go off the hooks, like some I could mention
in your own bunch, but if the man comes along you’ll fall in love
all right. Might as well try to stop a waterfall from jumping over
the rocks. I’m not so dead sure I do know what you’d do. Pride, and
high breeding, and duty would pull one way, but--well, I guess when
you marble women get waked up good and plenty, what they call roused,
you’re the worst kind. A considerable number of other things would pull
from the opposite direction, and one of them would be the man.”

“Ida!” said Ora, aghast. “How do you know so much? Your opportunities
have been very limited.”

“Oh, have they? Wasn’t I born and brought up in a mining camp? Butte is
some education, believe me. I ran straight all right, not only because
the sporting life had no charms for me but because I figured on moving
over one of these days to Millionaire Gulch. But it wasn’t for want of
opportunity, and the same opportunities were handed over by men of your
crowd--or fixin’ to be. Besides, some women are born wise that way, I
guess, and I’m one of ’em. You’ve been living in a sort of self-made
heaven all your life, with only books for inhabitants. I could put you
wise every day in the week.”

“It is true that although I saw a good deal of life while my mother
lived so much in the world, and always have been deeply interested
in the work of the psychological novelists, particularly the
Europeans--I--well, I never applied it to my--never thought much about
it until lately. I do not seem to know myself the least little bit.”

“I guess it’ll be me--Oh, Lord, I--taking you to Europe, not you me.
I’ll see that you don’t get into mischief, for I’d hate like the
dickens to have you go to pieces over any man. Not one of them that
ever lived since Adam is worth it. They’re all right to marry, all
things being equal, but to sacrifice your life for, nixie. Any style of
man you are partial to? I’ll keep his sort off with a broom.”

“I’ve never gone so far as even to think----”

“Every woman has her style in men,” said Ida firmly. “I heard of a
woman once who had three husbands and each one had a wart on his nose.”

“Oh, you are funny! I have heard that a woman falls in love with a
type, not with the man, and, like all epigrams, that one contains a
half-truth. I had two or three girlish fancies; one was an Austrian
officer, another a French nobleman--and not impecunious--he wasn’t
a fortune hunter. The third was a New Yorker who fell in love with
my cousin and married her. I had a few heart spasms over him, in
particular; possibly because he was quite out of reach. It is true that
they were all more of or less of a type--tall and thin and dark, with
something very keen and clever and modern in their lean--rather hard
faces.”

“Hi!” cried Ida.

“What is the matter? You look at me as if you had seen a ghost.”

Ida threw back her head and laughed, showing her sharp little white
teeth, and straining her throat until the firm flesh looked thin and
drawn, over too strong muscles. “Oh, Lord! I was just thinking what
a lot of trouble I’m in for, playing dragon to my lily-white lady. I
guess about half the men in the world are brunettes, fat or lean. Say,
are you going to the Prom? It’s only a month off.”

“I hadn’t thought about it. Probably. I have been asked to be a
patroness, and Mark is sure to want to go. Have you decided what to
wear?”

“Ma gave me a coral-red silk when I married, and I’m going to make it
over and veil it with black net.”

“Splendid!” cried Ora warmly. “Bring it up to the house. Mrs. Finley is
really an excellent seamstress. We’ll all take a hand. It will be great
fun. And you will look stunning.”

“What will you wear?”

“I expect some gowns from my New York dressmaker in a few days. It will
depend upon the state of my complexion, I fancy.”