IX


Ora looked round the large living-room of her bungalow with a deep
sense of content. The walls were covered with a material coarse in
weave and of a red warm but not too bright. The colour was repeated in
the divan and chairs, melting softly into browns that harmonised with
the heavy beams of the ceiling. A few Navajo rugs covered the floor.
Above the divan of many cushions was a bookshelf crowded with the new
fiction of two continents. Several shelves, built like a bookcase,
occupied a corner and were furnished more ponderously. In the middle
of the room a large table was half covered with the best periodicals
of the day, although there was room for a large lamp with a red shade
and a vase filled with wild flowers. Down at the far end of the room,
which was about thirty feet long, and opposite the kitchen, were
the dining-table and a small sideboard. The main door opened upon a
verandah, and one beside the fireplace into a narrow hall, giving
privacy to the bedrooms. Ora had no atavistic yearnings for the life
of the pioneer; she might feel as much at home in a bungalow as in a
palace, but elementals, save when pictorially valuable, like overhead
beams, were rigidly excluded.

Her hands clasped behind her, she drifted up and down the long room,
her mode of ambulation expressing the state of her mind. Quick and
final as she could be in decision, if necessity spurred, the deeper
sensuousness in her nature impelled her to drift whenever circumstances
would permit. For two months she intended to drift--or gamble! She had
not come out here further to alienate the affections of her friend’s
husband, and those old tumultuous dreams were still crowded in some
remote brain cell with seals on the door. She had even told herself in
so many words that she had no desire for anything so terrific as their
complete materialisation. She had plumbed the depth and intensity of
life in her imagination. Let that suffice. And reality was not so much
to be feared because of the wreck it might make of her life as because
it was reasonably sure to leave a corpse in her memory, instead of that
ever burning soul of past delights.

But she had come out to her mine to enjoy the constant companionship
of Gregory Compton before she left her country for ever and married
a European. That much she owed to the extraordinary imaginative
experience in which they had been one. If she could spend long hours
with him, make him as eager for her companionship as she was for his,
forget his mine now and then, feel that mysterious and satisfying bond
of the spirit, she would ask no more, not even an admission of love
when they parted.

When a woman goes on a still hunt for a man’s soul she is far more
dangerous than the obvious siren, for her self-delusion is complete,
her guards are down, her wiles disarming. Ora had had too little
practical experience of men to be prepared to admit, in spite of her
abstract knowledge of life, that there has been but one foundation of
love since the world began, and never will be another till life on
this planet ends, whatever may be the starry mysteries of the spheres.
But while she was (spasmodically) too honest to deny even her own sex
encumbrance, she believed, like many other, particularly American women
of narrow experience, that it had been politely emasculated by the
higher civilisation, was merely synonymous with poetry, romance, and
sentiment. This convention was imported to the New World by England’s
middle-class and became a convenient national superstition. It is on
the wane.

That Gregory, granted she were successful in capturing his soul, might
desire to contribute the rest of himself to the spoils, now that she no
longer was the wife of his friend, let loose those subversive passions
she had divined the night of their meeting and dared to recognise in
the realm of imagination, she would have refused to admit had the
possibility occurred to her. She was out for the ideal, and not yet had
she learned to take her imagination in hand like a refractory child.
Moreover, she had an imperious will, gracefully as she concealed it.
This last year of freedom and wealth and feminine triumphs had tempered
that will into a pliable and dangerous weapon. What she wanted she
would have. As she planned a thing so should it work out. But the
details--ah, they were veiled in the future, and from their mysteries
came this reflex vibration, this pleasant sense of drifting, of
wondering how it would all begin and what would happen next.

In a sense it had begun. Gregory had called two days before to ask
if she were comfortable. He was in his overalls (purposely), and had
refused at first to sit down, but finally had succumbed to the deepest
of the chairs before the log fire. He had finished by remaining for
supper, and again had occupied the chair until eleven o’clock. Neither
had suspected the other’s secret passion, for love before union, being
nine parts imagination, needs solitude for indulgence, and is capable,
moreover, of long and satisfying quietudes if fed with externals. There
was sheer delight in sitting together by that warm intimate fire,
at the dining-table at the end of the long shadowy room, in feeling
cut off from the world on the edge of that rough mountain camp, in
listening to the soughing of the pines during the silences. That both
were on their guard lest the other take fright and the experience
be impossible of repetition but exaggerated the atmosphere of
friendliness, of almost sexless comradeship. Gregory betrayed one only
of his reflections: he admitted to himself what Ora subtly compelled
him to admit, and had no difficulty in divining, that the companionship
of woman was a blessed thing, and that he had been the loneliest of men.

Their talk was mainly of ores! She was permitted to learn how little
else interested him in comparison with the enthralling inside of
Montana. But he told her also the legends of the great copper mines on
Lake Superior, so old that copper was found pure, looking much like the
smelted product from the copper ores of the later geological formations
of the Rocky Mountains. These vast mines, particularly that on Isle
Royal, bore unmistakable signs of having been worked systematically
by a prehistoric people experienced in mining; presumably by the
Atlantans, who, after their own mines were worked out and they still
demanded “orichalcum” for their monuments and bronze for their
implements, went annually in ships for the metal. That there had been
a self-supporting mining colony on Isle Royal was indicated by certain
agricultural remains.

Gregory and Ora had amused themselves reconstructing that old time
when the metal island was as lively as today, and considerably more
picturesque--owing to the alternative of skins for muck-spattered
overalls; an underground chapter of the Niebelungenlied, its gnomes
toiling down in those two miles of workings, stoping out less in a
hundred years than the methods of today force a mine to yield in one.
How they must have swarmed to the surface, regardless of discipline,
at the first signal of the approaching ships, their one link with a
world that was not all water and forest and underground cavern. By
what tortuous way did those archaic ships travel from the Atlantic to
the northwest corner of that vast inland sheet; unless, indeed, which
is likely, subsequent upheavals have destroyed a waterway which may
have connected sea and lake prior to 10000 B.C.[B] How many of those
old ships lie in the bed of Lake Superior, laden with rude nuggets of
copper, pounded from the gangue, or, who knows? smelted by a lost art
into sheets and blocks? Archaic ships rode high, and no doubt those
from Atlantis were overladen; for what has kept Atlantis in the realm
of myth so long save the unscientific legend that she perished of greed
and its vicious offspring? What archaic mysteries may not the terrible
storms of that great north lake yet uncover? What strange variety of
copper, washed and bitten by the waters of twelve thousand years, for
which the enraptured geologist must find a new name? Who knows?--the
bed of Lake Superior may be one unbroken floor of malachite; and the
North American Indian of that region the descendant of those ancient
miners, abandoned and forgotten when Atlantis plunged to the bottom of
the sea.

It was Ora who advanced these last frivolous theories, and--the clock
striking eleven--Gregory sprang to his feet.

“Likely as any,” he said. “All theories change about as often as it
is time to get out a new edition of an encyclopædia, or develop a
‘new school’ which makes its reputation by the short cut of upsetting
the solemn conclusions of its predecessors. I’m going down into the
mine.” He bolted out with no further ceremony, but Ora was long since
accustomed to the manners of Western men. She went to bed feeling that
sadness had gone out of the world.

She had not seen him since. Nor had anything new and interesting
happened. Her manager, Raymond, refused to take her down in the mine,
alleging that when Apex broke into the workings of Perch of the Devil,
there was sure to be a fight, and the bohunks would retreat, not up
their own shaft but through the tunnels of the Primo mine. The young
man was manifestly distressed to refuse any boon to so charming a
woman, and he and his foreman had moved at once into the half-finished
cottage, but he heartily wished her back in Butte, nevertheless. The
best of miners love a fight, and it would be impossible to protect her
from flying bullets if the row was continued above ground. Ora merely
had laughed when he begged her to return or to remain within doors, but
had promised to be prudent and flourished her automatic .25.