X


She glanced at the clock. It was half-past three. She knew that Gregory
frequently went below in the morning, and had half expected that he
would cross over to her hill for a moment when he came up at three
o’clock. The drifting mood vanished. She decided that two days were
enough for feminine passivity and went to her bedroom and changed her
pretty house frock for a stout out-of-doors’ costume of forest green
tweed: as she had no mind to look either the outworn Western heroine of
romance, or a fright, she had omitted khaki from her mountain wardrobe.
She tied a light green veil round her head, put on a pair of loose
chamois gloves, selected a green parasol lined with pink, and went out
to give the fates a gentle shove.

Hitherto she had so far yielded to the solicitude of her manager as to
take her walks through the pine woods above her bungalow, but today she
marched deliberately through her grove and stood for several moments
on the edge of the little bluff above the tableland on which her claim
was located. It was her first prolonged look at the three mining
camps, for she had arrived at night. She had driven out occasionally
to mining camps with her father, once or twice with Mark; the scene
was both typical and picturesquely ugly. In or near the centre of each
claim was the shaft house; fifty feet beyond--the distance prescribed
by law to prevent overhead fires from communicating with underground
timbers--were the buildings containing the hoisting machinery and the
compressed air plant. Scattered about were the shacks of the miners,
the long bunk- and mess-houses, blacksmith and carpenter shops. Just
below the Apex claim, and on Government land, an enterprising publican
had established himself. On all sides were other claims of recent
location, for there had been the inevitable rush.

The rude buildings were grey and weather-beaten, and all traces of the
gentle spring verdure had disappeared. About the collar of each shaft
was an immense dump heap, waste rock brought up from the depths, and
the highest of these was on Perch of the Devil. Near each were the ore
bins, but these for the most part were empty, and, save on the De Smet
hill, there was a notable absence of “double-sixes.” The Primo vein had
not been recovered, Apex had not yet touched bottom; Gregory Compton,
for reasons best known to himself, had changed his original plan and
was merely uncovering his new vein, taking out as little of its ore as
possible. His bins were furnished with ore from the second level of his
mine, where work had proceeded steadily on the original vein.

The men off shift were standing about in groups as they did in Butte,
or passing in and out of the saloon. And the racket was deafening: the
roar of the machinery in the hoisting and compressor houses, the crash
of rock dumped from the buckets or skips, the ringing of hammer on
anvil. The scene was not beautiful but it was alive! One could fancy
the thrill of the hidden metals, knowing that their hour, after vast
geological ages of waiting, was come; that, like mortals, they were to
agonise in the crucible of life and achieve their ultimate destiny.

Ora walked through the grove until she was beyond the long mess-house
at the back of her claim, climbed over the abrupt rise of Apex--which,
combined with the hardness of the rock, had made its task so long--and,
ascertaining that the larger buildings hid her, crawled under the De
Smet fence, and drew a long breath as she set her feet squarely on the
famous Perch of the Devil. Here the buildings, large and small, were
scattered up to the brow of the hill and over on the other side. It
had, in fact, something of the appearance of a growing village with
irregular streets; and before several of the cabins children were
playing, or women took their Monday washing from the line. The fronts
of some of these cottages were painted white, and here and there
flowers grew in boxes. There were even a reading-room and a large
“general store.” Altogether Perch of the Devil looked as if it might
grow larger, and more solid and permanent of aspect, with the years.

Ora walked through the crooked streets on the steep hillside until
she reached the deep chamber into which had leached the acids of the
centuries to enrich the ores, and incidentally Gregory Compton.
Thousands of tons of dump made a hill in itself and shut off the view
to the south, but below were the acres of waving wheat, the alfalfa
with its purple flower, the sprouting flax, the winding creek that
was often dry but sometimes wet, the brush sheds for the cattle, the
substantial farm buildings. The broad peaceful expanse looked as
if even a winter wind had never shaken it, so entirely did it seem
dissociated from the frantic energies of its northeast corner. And
still beyond was perfect beauty: the massive pine-covered mountains,
rising tier above tier, ridges of the great Rockies, far away and up to
the sky-cutting line, glittering with eternal snows. For a few moments
Ora forgot the raucous noises about her, Nature delivering herself
of her precious children with loud protesting pains. Then she turned
suddenly and looked upward.

Gregory had just stepped from his cabin. For a moment he did not see
her, but stood staring, his hands in his pockets, at the distant
mountains. He wore his favourite overalls and a battered cap on
the back of his head; but he looked so remote in spirit from that
materialising costume that Ora watched him with a sensation of helpless
jealousy. Not for a moment could she delude herself that he was
thinking of her. He looked like a seer.

“Can you see right into the heart of those mountains?” she asked
lightly, as she walked up the hill toward him. “You looked as if your
imagination were ‘blocking out’ thousands of tons of gold quartz.”

He started and coloured, but smiled with a sudden pleasure at the
charming picture in the foreground. “Something like that. This mine
is all right, and now that I’ve got over my disappointment, I have a
feeling for it that I guess I’ll never have for another mine--something
like the affection for one’s first born! But all the same I intend to
have a gold mine one of these days. Have you been admiring my view?”

He had walked down and joined her.

“Yes, but that is not what I came over here for. Nor is it what I came
out to the mines for. I brought a small library, but I find I am not in
the humour for books. I want to be doing something myself. Mr. Raymond
won’t take me down into my mine. I want to go down into yours--now.”

He hesitated a moment. “Well--why not? Apex is not working this
afternoon--something the matter with their compressor. They sounded
pretty close to our workings this morning, but the men quit about one
o’clock, and as they didn’t blast it was probably because the holes
weren’t deep enough. I’ve just been told that they can’t get to work
again before tomorrow. But you look much too fine!”

“Everything cleans; and I’ll leave my veil and parasol in the shaft
house.”

“All right,” he said abruptly. “Come along.”

When they were in the shaft house he asked, “Will you go down in the
skip or by the ladder?”

“Oh, I couldn’t possibly do anything so ignominious as to go down in a
bucket, and I’m very agile. How far is it?”

“A hundred feet. I shall only take you to the first level.”

Ora peered down into the black and slanting and apparently bottomless
well. A ladder was built flat against one side. A skip full of ore was
banging against the sides of the other compartment on its way up. She
looked again at the ladder, shuddered, and set her teeth.

Gregory put two candles in his pocket, inserted his long limber body
into the narrow aperture and ran down sideways.

“Oh!” gasped Ora. “I can’t do that. Please wait. I--I think I’d better
go down backward.”

“By all means. Sit down and turn round. I’ll catch hold of one of your
feet and put it on a rung. The rest will be easy.”

Ora followed these instructions gingerly, concluding that the skip
would have been more dignified. Then she forgot dignity and only
wondered if her bones had gone out of her: she had rolled over on her
equatorial zone and was kicking helplessly in the void. But as Gregory
caught her feet and planted them safely she set her teeth once more and
summoned her pride.

“Glad you have on stout boots,” he said, practically. “We’ve not enough
water in the mine for pumps, but it’s a little damp underfoot. Wait a
minute while I light a candle.” He struck a match and performed this
feat; how, Ora could not even guess; but she glanced down sideways and
saw that he was holding the lighted candle up at arm’s length.

“Come on,” he said. “You mustn’t be frightened.”

“I’m not a bit frightened, but don’t go too fast.”

Gregory, who was running down the ladder, moderated his pace, and sent
up an occasional word of cheer. Suddenly Ora heard a horrid noise below
like the crash and roar of an express train. “Has the mine fallen in?”
she gasped.

“Hope not. That’s the tram with ore and rock for the skip. By and by
we’ll use the waste rock to fill up the stopes with, but we’re only
blocking out at present.”

“How frightfully interesting mining is--in all its details!” Ora’s
hands were smarting, and every part of her, not excluding her
imagination, felt as if on the rack. “That noise is over!”

“Did I hear you say ‘Thank heaven’?”

“Of course not. How much farther is it? Haven’t we passed the first
level?”

“If we had I should be carrying you. Only about twenty feet more.”

And a few moments later, with the deepest sigh of relief she had ever
drawn, she was standing in the small station beside the shaft.

“It’s hard work the first time,” he said sympathetically. “But you’ll
soon get used to it.”

“How dark it is!”

“I’ll put in electricity when my troubles with Amalgamated are over.”
He lit another candle and handed it to her. “Be careful of your frock.”

The ore car was rumbling away in the distance. Gregory followed the
sound down the tunnel and Ora kept close at his heels. “I suppose we’ll
see something after a while?” she ventured. “I can’t see even you now,
only your candle.”

“We’ll soon be out of this,” he said cheerfully. “You see, we’ve had
to walk under the chamber from which I took that great deposit of
carbonates, and then some----” He paused a moment, but not before he
had turned acutely to the left. “This is where I lost the vein. We
are in the fault now. How would you like to be in an earthquake that
broke a vein in two and hurled one end----” His voice was lost in the
rattling roar of the compressed air drills, although there was nothing
to be seen until they reached another little station and faced a wider
drift on the right, some twelve feet long. Candles were flaring from
the miners’ candlesticks, whose long points were thrust into stulls or
the softer part of the rock, and four men were manipulating two of the
cumbersome air drills which stood on tripods. Gregory made a sign to
the shift boss, who shut off a valve, and the din stopped abruptly.

“Now,” said Gregory. “This is what you have come for.” He moved his
candle along the brassy glitter of chalcopyrite in the vein, steadying
her with his arm, for the floor was uneven and littered.

Ora trembled. She forgot the arm about her; it felt like mere steel
for that matter; she was in one of the magic caverns of her dreams and
she thrilled to the magnet of the ores. “It looks like pure gold,” she
whispered.

“So it is in a sense, and far more beautiful to look at in the vein.”
They had been standing near the opening of the drift. He guided her
down toward the farther end; the miners made way for them and went out
to the station nothing loath; owing their lives to what has cost many a
man his life and more, the caprice of a woman.

“I want to show you how the holes look before we put the sticks of
powder in,” Gregory began, as he waved his candle once more aloft, this
time over a less dazzling surface. He stopped abruptly. She felt his
body stiffen. Then, as he whirled her about, he screamed to the men:

“Get out! Run!”

Ora had the sensation of being swept along by a bar of steel burrowing
into the flesh of her waist. But in another instant she had lost all
sense of her body. There was a shock as if something had hit the hill
at its foundations, a dull roar, and then the crash of falling rock
behind them.

The men were all ahead. Ora dimly could see them running like rabbits
up the fault drift. Then she became conscious of the stifling sickening
smell of powder and a bursting sensation in her head. No one paused for
a second, nor drew breath until all had turned the corner and were in
the main level. For a space nothing was heard but the hoarse effort to
refill tormented lungs. The men leaned against the walls of the tunnel.
Ora leaned against Gregory. All sense of fear had departed out of
her. She had had her baptism of fire and doubted if she ever should be
capable of the sensation of fear again.

The silence lasted but a moment. Out of the intense darkness flew oaths
like red-hot rocks from boiling craters.

“Shut up!” said Gregory sharply. “There’s a lady here. And light up
if you have any extra candles. I’ve dropped mine. We must find out if
anybody is missing.”

“I held on to mine,” said Ora proudly. Gregory lit it, and the shift
boss counted his men. “All here, sir; but by jink, it was a narrow
squeak. The--the--the----”

“Never mind--who’s this?” A man was running toward them from the
direction of the shaft.

“It’s me, sir.” Gregory recognised Mann’s voice. “I’ve just got on to
what they were up to. There wasn’t a blamed thing the matter with the
compressor. They just meant to catch us off guard--anybody hurt?”

“All right. How did you find out?”

“I suspicioned something crooked, so I got one of those damned bohunks
drunk and bribed him. They’d put in the sticks before they quit,
pretending the compressor had gone wrong and they couldn’t finish
drilling. I suppose they sneaked back while I was getting the story,
and lit the fuses.”

“You’ll let us get back at ’em, boss?” demanded the men.

“Oh, yes,” said Gregory, in a voice of deadly irony. “We’ll get back at
them.”

He was holding the candle. Ora saw him bend his head forward in the
attitude so characteristic of him. But he raised it in a moment.

“Go up, every one of you,” he said, “and down to the saloon. Talk
about what happened, but assume that it was an accident. Any fighting
above ground and you’ll be canned. Say that there’s a big cave-in and
we’re obliged to quit work on this level for the present. See that
that spreads all over Apex camp. Say that I’ve given you the rest of
the shift off. Come down as soon as you’ve had your drink and said
your say. Jerry”--to the shift boss--“you watch the Apex shaft house.
I don’t figure that they’ll go down under an hour, on account of the
smoke, but if they do just drop below. I’ll wait for you here. And
before you come,” he added grimly, “go over to the compressor house
and tell them to turn the steam on the air line.”

“Hooray!” The shouting of the men made almost as much noise in the
tunnel as the recent explosion. “That’s the ticket, boss. Oh, we won’t
do a thing to them!”

“Get out of this,” said the shift boss. “Don’t take more than one
drink; and hold on to your tempers, or there’ll be no fun below.”

A moment later Gregory and Ora were alone in the tunnel.