XXII


Therefore was he in no mood to fight another temptation; rather to
take a sardonic pleasure in succumbing. An hour later, in overalls,
and assisted by two of his labourers, outwardly more excited than
he, for they had worked underground and vowed they smelt ore, he was
running an open cut along the line of the float. As there was no
outcropping it was mere guesswork; it might be weeks before he struck
any definite sign of an ore body, but he was prepared to level the hill
if necessary. Until he did come upon indications that would justify
the expense, however, he was resolved not to sink a shaft nor drive a
tunnel.

They used pick and shovel until at the depth of eight feet they struck
rock. Gregory had been prepared for this and sent the unwilling but
interested Oakley into Pony for drills and powder. For two days more
they drilled and blasted; then--Gregory took out his watch and noted
the hour, twenty-three minutes after four--one of the men gave a shout
and tossed a fragment into the air.

“Stringer, by jinks!” he cried. “And it’s copper carbonate or I’m a
dead ’un.”

Gregory frowned, but laid the bit of ore gently on his palm and
regarded it with awe. He wanted gold, but at least this was his,
and the first of his treasure to be torn from its sanctuary. For a
moment the merely personal longing was lost in the enthusiasm of the
geologist, for the fragment in his hand was very beautiful, a soft rich
shaded green flecked with red; the vugs, or little cells, looked as if
lined with deep green velvet.

But he turned and stared at the mining camp beyond his boundary line.
One of the bits of float he had found last year had been gold quartz.
Had it travelled, a mere chip, from the original body to this distant
point, or danced here on the shoulders of an earthquake? Float, even
under a layer of soil was often found so far from the ore body, that
it was a more fallible guide than a prospector’s guess. He walked to
the end of the hill, while his miners shrugged their shoulders and
resumed the drilling.

The great vein of the Primo mine was dipping acutely to the right.
Might it not be wise for him to abandon his present position and sink a
shaft close to the line, trusting to his practical knowledge and highly
organized faculty to strike the vein?

He stood for half an hour debating the question, listening to the
intermittent roar of the engine, the rattle of ore dumped from the
buckets. Then he walked back to the red gash in his own land. It would
be the bitterest disappointment of his life if he failed to find gold
in his hill, but the dominant voice in his brain was always practical,
and it advised him to follow the willing metal for the present instead
of incurring the expense of a shaft and possible litigation.

“’Nother stringer!” announced one of the men, as Gregory arrived at the
long deep cut. “Guess it’s time for a windlass.”

“Guess it is. Go down to the house and get some lumber.”

He descended into the cut and looked at the unmistakable evidence of
little veins. Were they really stringer, tentacles of a great ore
body climbing toward the surface, or a mere series of independent and
insignificant veins not worth exploiting? He was in a pessimistic mood,
but laughed suddenly as he realised how disappointed he would be should
further excavation demonstrate there was no chamber of copper ore below.

Four hours later the windlass was finished and four men were at work.
At the end of the fortnight the windlass had been discarded in favor
of a gasoline hoist, and twenty-five men in three shifts were employed
upon a chamber of copper carbonate ore. The nearest of the De Smet
hills began to take on the appearance of a mining camp; a mess-house
and a number of cabins were building. Trees were falling, not only to
make room for the new “town” but to timber the mine when the time came
to sink or drift. At present those of the miners that could not be
housed by the disgusted Oakley occupied tents or rude shacks. Oakley
spent the greater part of his time escorting the great six-horse
teams from the ranch to the public road, as their drivers showed an
indifference to his precious crops only rivalled by Gregory Compton’s.

Mark took a week’s vacation after the first carload of ore had been
shipped from Pony to the sampling works in Butte and netted $65 a ton.
Gregory, who was working with his men, far too impatient and surcharged
with energy to walk about as mere manager, paid scant attention to him
during the day; but Mark was content to sit on the edge of the cut and
smoke and calculate, merely retreating in haste when the men lit the
fuses.

On the third morning, as he was approaching the mine at dawn with
his host, Gregory suddenly announced his intention of sending for a
manager; he purposed to sink a shaft on the edge of the chamber in
order to determine if the present lode was the top of a vein.

“Better take off your coat and go to work,” he added. “Do you good.
You’re getting too fat.”

“Getting? Thanks. But I don’t mind. You’ve got several hundred thousand
dollars in that chamber by the looks of things, but I suppose that
wouldn’t satisfy you?”

“Lord, no. That is merely the necessary capital to mine the entire
hill--or fight the powers that be when they get on to the fact that
I’ve got another Anaconda.”

“Do you believe it? Big pockets have been found in solitary splendor
before this.”

“This hill is mineral from end to end,” said Gregory with intense
conviction. “And I want to get to the main lode as quickly as possible.”

“By the way,” said Mark abruptly, “why don’t you locate your claim?”

“Locate? Why, the land’s mine. Patent is all right. My father even
patented several placer claims----”

“Mining laws are fearful and wonderful things. Judges, with a fat
roll in their pockets, have been known to make fearful and wonderful
interpretations before this. If you’ve struck a new copper belt--well,
the enemy has billions. Better stake off the entire hill, and apply for
patents. You may be grey before you get them, but the application is
enough----”

“It would cost a lot of money, and I don’t like the idea of paying
twice over. This is costing thousands----”

“And you’ll soon be taking out thousands a week. But if you need it all
I’ll lend you the money. It would be a good investment for Ora. You can
pay me four per cent. I’ve a mind to go ahead today and begin staking
off.”

Gregory stood still with his head inclined at the angle which indicated
that he was concentrating his mind. “Very well,” he said curtly. “Go
ahead. And I don’t need your money. Stake off every inch of the hill
and have a good map made. See that the side lines are flush with the
boundary. Of course I’d never have any trouble with you, but Mrs. Blake
might take it into her head to sell. Get out a surveyor when you’re
ready for him. Don’t bother me until the thing is done.”

Mark took a longer vacation and worked off some twenty pounds. He
wished ruefully that Ora would return suddenly, for he doubted that
his love of good living would undo the excellent work when he was once
more in Butte. He employed a U. S. deputy mineral surveyor, the map was
made, Gregory applied for his patents; the lawyers’s mind was at rest
for the present, although he kept his ears open in Butte.

Gregory sank his shaft ostensibly to determine the dip and width of the
vein leading from the chamber, but secretly with the hope of meeting
the body of ore already uncovered in the Primo Mine. He was elated with
his splendid “find” and sudden wealth, but his old dream never left him
for a moment. Indeed he would have been more than willing to miss the
pyroxenite if he could come upon a lode of quartz containing free gold.
That was what he had visualised all his life. He wanted to stand in his
own stopes and flash his lantern along glittering seams, not merely
send masses of decomposed grey-black ore to the sampling works and
await returns. If he found a vein worth the outlay he would erect his
own stamp mill and listen to its music. Such is the deathless boy that
exists in all men. Mere wealth meant far less to him than the beautiful
costly toy to play with for a while.

The shaft at the end of a month had gone down eighty feet; but
had revealed only a lean vein of copper carbonates which made him
forget his dreams in the fear that his mine was pinching out. But he
persisted, and one morning when he went to the bottom of the shaft
after the smoke of the blast had cleared away, and lit his candle,
he picked up a lump of yellow ore that glittered like quartz packed
with free gold. For a moment his head swam. He knelt down and brushed
the shattered rock from several other bits of what looked like virgin
gold; and he caressed them as gently as if they had been the cheek of
his first born. But he was a geologist. He stepped into the ascending
bucket a prey to misgivings. As soon as he examined his treasure in the
sunlight he knew it at once for chalcopyrite--the great copper ore of
the sulphide zone.

After he had assayed it he philosophically dismissed regret. It ran
$26 in copper with slight values of gold and silver. Chalcopyrite ore,
as a rule, runs about five per cent. in copper, its commercial value
lying in the immense quantities in which it may be found, although it
is necessary to concentrate at the mine. If he had struck one of the
rare veins of massive chalcopyrite, averaging $25 a ton, he would take
out, after it was sufficiently developed, several thousand dollars a
day; and, like the carbonates, it could go straight to the smelter. As
a matter of fact the vein when uncovered proved to be six feet wide
and grew slightly broader with depth. The miners were jubilant over
their “fool’s gold”, and a number of people came out and asked for the
privilege of looking at what the foreman, Joshua Mann, declared to be
the prettiest pay streak in Montana.

Gregory found his chalcopyrite during the third month after he began to
investigate the hill. The chamber already had netted him over a hundred
thousand dollars and grew richer with depth. He put an extra force at
work on the promising shoot.

In the Primo Mine the luck varied. The two engineers, Osborne and
Douglas, exhausted the first lode, struck a poor vein, averaging ten
dollars a ton, then ran into a body of the ore netting as high as four
hundred dollars. Two months later they came up suddenly against a wall
of country rock. Undaunted, they drove through the mass, and struck a
lean shoot of chalcopyrite.