I


Two weeks later Ora and Ida sailed from Havre. Gregory had cabled, and
the _Herald_ had published a dramatic account, of the wounding of Mr.
Mark Blake in the tunnel of his wife’s mine. The engineers’ lease had
expired and he had closed down the mine temporarily. The sinking of
the inclined shaft in the “Apex” had proceeded very slowly owing to
the uncommon hardness of the rock; it would seem that Nature herself
had taken a hand in the great fight and enlisted for once on the side
of the weaker power. Although when Osborne and Douglas had turned over
the mine, their cross-cut almost had reached the point on the vein
which the new shaft expected to strike, Gregory had risen twice in the
night and walked along the hill beyond his boundary, reasonably sure
that all the blasting was not in the shaft, his keen ear detecting
muffled reverberations slightly to the east and at a greater depth. He
communicated his suspicions to Mark, and on the following night they
examined the lock on the Primo shaft house and discovered that it had
been tampered with. They went down by way of the ladder; and in the
cross-cut on the chalcopyrite vein they found miners working with hand
drills. There was a desperate hand-to-hand fight with the manager and
shift boss; the miners, who were bohunks, proceeding phlegmatically
with their work.

The four men had wrestled out into the station at the foot of the
shaft, where they had drawn their “guns”; each had been wounded, but
only Mark seriously. He had received a ball in the lung and another
in the leg. The night was bitterly cold and it was some time before
Gregory and the two antagonists could get him to the surface. He had
insisted upon being taken to a hospital in Butte; and, between loss of
blood, shock, and pneumonia, his condition was precarious.

The girls, who had left Monte Carlo two days after Valdobia’s sudden
departure, received the news in Paris, where they were replenishing
their wardrobes. Ora, torn with remorse, and terrified with vague and
tragic visions of the future, was in a distracted condition; but Ida,
although she sincerely lamented the possible demise of her old friend,
did not lose her head. She gave final and minute orders to tailors and
dressmakers, instructed them to send the trousseaux in bond directly to
Great Falls, Montana, devoted a morning to the selection of hats both
for herself and her friend, and packed all the trunks. Mowbray, always
willing to be useful, bought their tickets and escorted them to Havre.
Ida thanked him with something like real warmth as they parted at the
head of the gangplank, and promised him the “time of his life” when he
came to Montana in the summer.

“Now, buck up,” she said, smiling into his disconsolate face; “you know
I’m not flirting with you. We’re the best of pals. I’ll be glad to see
you, all right, and perhaps I’ll find a nice little heiress for you.”

“Oh, don’t!” Mowbray tried to arrange his features for the benefit of
the passersby. “You know I’m fond of you no end. Why----”

“Get along now. That’s the last whistle. Good-bye, and write me nice
gossippy letters. It’s only a few months, anyhow.”

Mowbray walked down the gangplank with his head in the air, and, as he
turned on the dock to lift his hat, Ida noticed that his face, whose
charm was its boyish gayety, looked suddenly older, and almost as
determined as Valdobia’s.

“Oh, Lord!” she thought, as she turned away, “men! They’re as alike as
lead pencils in a box. But I guess I can manage him.”

Ora stayed in bed for two days; reaction left her physically exhausted
and she slept most of the time. On the third day Ida peremptorily
dressed her and took her on deck. A wireless from Gregory, announcing
that Mark was holding his own, further revived her, and before they
reached New York another wireless was still more reassuring. A few
years before, when the ores of Butte Hill were roasted in the open
and the poisonous fumes were often as thick as the worst of London
fogs, pneumonia ran its course in twenty-four hours to the grave, but
in these days the patient had a fighting chance despite the altitude.
The Butte doctors were experts in pneumonia, so many of the careless
miners were afflicted, and Mark not only had a sound constitution but
never had been a heavy drinker. There was every reason to expect him to
pull through, as Ida assured her friend whenever they were alone; but
she managed to meet several agreeable people, and kept herself and Ora
companioned by them throughout the voyage.

Valdobia was still in Rome; his mother was dying. He had written daily
to Ora and she had read and reread his letters. They said neither too
much nor too little; but he was one of life’s artists and he managed
to pervade them with an atmosphere that was both sweet and disturbing.
His telegram, when he had read the news of her husband’s misadventure
in the newspapers, was a masterpiece. If he was unable to grieve over
the possibility of Mr. Blake’s abrupt removal from a scene where he was
the one superfluous actor, too well-bred to betray his relief, and too
little of a hypocrite to be verbose in condolence, his attitude was
so finely impersonal, and it was so obvious that he knew exactly how
she felt, that Ora liked him more than ever if only for rousing her
stricken sense of humour.

She had thrust his letters and telegrams into the depths of her steamer
trunk, but after she had made up her mind that Mark would recover (her
lively imagination picturing him hobbling among the orange groves of
Southern California while she guided his footsteps and diverted his
mind), she retrieved the correspondence and read it every night when
alone in her stateroom. Valdobia’s devotion not only gave her courage,
but his strong imposing personality stood with a haughty and confident
menace between herself and Gregory Compton. She refused to think on her
future, beyond the long convalescence of her husband, but had it not
been for her meeting with Valdobia and her deliberate installment of
his image on the throne of her adventurous imagination, she doubted if
she would have had the courage to return to Montana. As it was there
were moments when the poignant mental life she had led with Gregory
Compton reached a long finger from the depths to which it had been
consigned and sketched his image in her mind as vividly as if he stood
before her; while her whole being ached with longing and despair. But
her will was strong; she banished him summarily and reinstated the
Roman who was so like and so unlike the man compounded of the old world
and the new in the mortar of the Northwest.

Ida, with an unexpected delicacy, refrained from curiosity, and
although she had too much tact to avoid all mention of Valdobia, only
alluded to him casually. She left Europe out of the conversation as
much as possible, and amused Ora, when they were alone, with the
plans of her campaign in Butte. When they reached quarantine Ora was
horrified to find herself surrounded by reporters. The Paris _Herald_
had published the story of her mine as well as her picture and Ida’s,
but they hardly had been sensible of their notoriety until, on the
steamer, they were among Americans once more. It was manifest that they
were “big news” in their own country, and Ora fled to her stateroom,
leaving Ida to face the reporters alone.

Ida was undaunted; moreover she was quick to seize her first
opportunity to dazzle Butte. She made herself amiable and interesting
to the young men, her natural cunning steering her mid-stream, in this
her first interview: an ordeal in which most novices are wrecked on
the tropic or the arctic shore. She thanked them as warmly for their
news that Mr. Blake had left that morning with his doctors and nurses
in a private car for Southern California, and expected his wife to
go directly to Los Angeles, as if Ora had not received a wireless to
that effect an hour before; she modestly told them something of her
social experiences abroad, answered the inevitable questions regarding
suffrage, excused Ora, “who was naturally upset”, and expatiated upon
her happiness in returning to live in Butte. They thought this odd, but
were so delighted with her mixture of dignity and naïveté that they
rushed to their respective desks and told the world that the wife of
Gregory Compton had been the guest of princes and was the handsomest
woman in America.

Ora was almost gay at the prospect of going directly to California,
although she was obliged to make the journey alone. It was early in
the afternoon when they landed. Ida established Ora in the first
Overland Limited that left the Grand Central Station, and returned to
the Waldorf-Astoria, where she had engaged rooms for a month. She had
no intention of returning to Butte ignorant of New York. Westerners
of wealth, old and recent, visited New York casually several times
a year; and not to know it, even with Europe to her credit, stamped
a woman with the newness of the new-rich who wore all their jewels
all the time. Ida had seen many women make fools of themselves and
had no intention of leaving any penetrable spaces in her armour. She
spent every morning in the shops, or in the establishments of the
exclusive dressmakers, tailors and milliners that were patronized by
the fashionable women of Butte and Helena, giving them liberal orders.
She saw all the new plays, heard the more famous of the opera singers,
and even attended three symphony concerts. She drove in the Park every
afternoon or joined the throngs on Fifth Avenue; and she took tea or
lunch in the different hotels and restaurants devoted to fashion.
Sometimes she sat in the gangways of her own famous hostellerie,
recalling with a tolerant smile her early crude ambitions--had
they died less than a year ago?--to trail her feathers up and down
Peacock Alley. She wore one of her severest tailored suits upon these
occasions, and maintained an air of stately detachment that somewhat
counteracted the always startling beauty of her face and figure. No man
took his courage in his hand.

One afternoon she sat longer than usual, for she had set her teeth that
day and walked through the Metropolitan Museum. She fell to musing,
and with a more sustained introspection than was her habit, upon the
changes that had taken place within herself during the past year;
wondering “how deep they had struck”, if she really were as altered as
she must appear even to the raking eye of Butte; or if she merely had
developed her native characteristics while polishing her surface and
furnishing her mind.

She also endeavoured to analyse her attitude toward returning to her
husband, but gave this up, although puzzled that it was not more
obvious. But her mind was clear on one point. If Gregory desired her
society he must spend his week-ends in Butte; nothing would induce her
to return to the De Smet ranch. She had not even a spasm of curiosity
to see the famous Perch of the Devil Mine.