VIII


As the women dispersed about the long drawing-room Ora laid her arm
lightly round the waist of Ida, who was standing for the moment apart.

“Your dinner is a tremendous success, my dear,” she said, “and so are
you. That gown! It makes mine look so crude. I wish I had worn white as
I intended until the last minute. How splendidly everything went off.
Not a detail to criticise, and every woman has worn something new from
New York or Paris. But you--well, Ida, you are always beautiful, of
course, but tonight you are something more than lovely.”

“Oh, am I?” Ida gave a little gasp, forgetting her passing astonishment
at so much tribute from Ora at once. “Well, I ought to be. I never felt
quite like this in all my life. Geewhil--no, I’m too happy even for
slang. I wish I could sing.”

Ora sighed. “I’ve always known you would get everything you wanted, and
I can guess just how you feel tonight. You are a complete success. How
many people ever are able to say that?”

“Yes, I feel as if I owned the earth!” But her brows met in a puzzled
frown. “I never felt, though, as if even the conquest of Butte would
all but send me off my head. I never feel very much excited about any
old thing; it’s not my make; but I’ve got a sort of shiver inside of
me, and a watery feeling in the heart region. If that chef had spoilt
the dinner I’d have gone out and wrung his neck.”

“Well, nothing can go wrong now. The worst is over, and no dinner was
ever more delicious. Why don’t you let them dance? I know that Mrs.
O’Hara plays.”

“Good idea! I’ll ring this minute for a few of those extra near-waiters
to take out the rugs and move the furniture.”

Two of the younger women, who had returned not long since from San
Francisco, were showing their scandalised friends the turkey-trot when
the men came down the hall from the dining-room. Ida drew Gregory aside.

“Tell me,” she asked, with an eager almost childish note in her voice
new to him. “Did it go off well? Am I all I ought to be after all the
money you have spent on me? Do I look nice in my fine clothes?”

Gregory patted her on the shoulder. “I know little about such things,”
he said kindly, “but it outclassed all the banquets I’ve been obliged
to attend in the last six or eight months. I felt quite proud that it
was in my own house--yours, to be literal--and Mrs. Blake assured me
that she had never seen anything better done.”

“Ora is an angel, and without her--but you know all that. Tell
me--well, Gregory, I want a good old-fashioned compliment!”

His voice lost its bantering tone and became formal with gallantry:
“You are, as ever, the handsomest woman in Montana. I shouldn’t wonder
a bit if those New York reporters were right and that you are the
handsomest woman in America.”

Ida looked for a long moment into his eyes. Again her brows met in a
puzzled frown, this time because her singular lightness of spirit had
fled abruptly. She was too proud, too far developed beyond the old Ida,
to put forth the arts of the siren until they were alone; but she asked
softly, and again with that almost childish naïveté:

“Do you really admire me?”

“You are all right,” he said with a heartiness that masked a sudden
misgiving. “I must come in and take you to the theatre the next time a
good show comes to town. Let me know. I’ll gratify my vanity by sitting
beside you in a box----”

“There’s a play tomorrow night. Stay over!”

“I’m sorry. I don’t dare. Apex is sinking for all she’s worth. We may
have a set-to any minute. It was a risk even to come away for a night.”

“Oh, do let me go out, and down into the mine----”

“I should think not. And do your best to keep Mrs. Blake in Butte for
at least a week.”

“Well, let me go out when the danger is over. I long to see
chalcopyrite in the vein. I saw some beautiful specimens at the School
of Mines the other day. It looks like pure gold.”

He looked at her in amazement. “What on earth do you know about ores?
Did you include Freiberg in your itinerary?”

“This is Butte, remember. I no sooner returned than I realised how
interesting she was.”

“Ah, well, when this affair is settled, come out and stay with Mrs.
Blake and I’ll take you down. I’ve no place to put you up. Even the
ranch house is full. Mrs. Blake’s manager and foreman are boarding
there at present, and Oakley also puts up my secretary----”

“And those crops Oakley put in with such enthusiasm?” cried Ida with a
sudden inspiration, and racking her memory. “Did they turn out as he
expected? Was there a drought--in--in--those states?”

“What a memory you have! Yes, Oakley is doing wonders, and the drought
arrived as per schedule. He would scorn to put the ranch under the
ditch, although that is my long suit at present.”

“I suppose Circle-G Ranch looks like Holland by this time.”

“Not quite yet! But the work is progressing splendidly, all except----”
He paused. It had never been his habit to talk to her, and the
complicated details of business he regarded as beyond the intelligent
apprehension of any woman. But as Ida moved closer to him with
wide-open eyes she looked intelligent enough to understand anything,
and a letter received that morning had been on his mind ever since.
“There is some trouble about the railroad,” he said. “The Land Company
was to build it, but either doesn’t want the bother or really has lost
a lot of money, as it claims. I placed a deed in escrow which pledges
me to build it if the Land Company failed to keep its agreement; and
the seed houses, which bought several large blocks of land, and a
number of private settlers are demanding that the railroad be begun--it
was to be finished at the end of a year----”

Ida saw her opportunity and grasped it. “We both must do our duty, and
not monopolise each other,” she said hurriedly. “But tell me all about
it after they have gone. Now, go and dance with Kitty Collier. She’s
the best-looking woman in Butte. I can’t dance in this harness, but
I’ll talk English politics with my portlier guests.” As he smiled and
moved toward the music, she laid her hand lightly on his arm. “I want
to thank you for coming tonight, Gregory,” she said. “It means a great
deal to me socially. Besides, it is good to see you again.” And this
time she looked very sweet; but there was a slight aloofness in her
manner, as if to admonish him that, although he was forgiven, there was
still a breach which it was for him to close. Then she added lightly:
“Well, we’ll talk it all over later. Go, now, and dance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Gregory stood by the front door talking to two of the men, whose wives
had walked on; their homes were but a door or two away. Ida ran up the
stairs to Ora’s room, where they unhooked each other.

“You look tired,” said Ida, sympathetically.

“Oh, I am tired,” replied Ora, her arms hanging. “Tired. Tired.”

“It’s a long while since you danced like that. Just drop into bed. Lend
me a scarf, will you?”

She covered her opened gown with the lace and walked slowly over to
her room. Then she suddenly turned back to the head of the stairs. The
three men were still talking below.

“Gregory,” she called, and her voice was very sweet.

“Yes?”

“Lock up, will you? The servants have gone to bed.”

“I will.”

“Don’t forget,” and omitting to add a good-night, she went swiftly to
her room, changed her formal evening gown for a soft combination of
yellow silk and lace that made her look like a tulip in a primrose bed,
let down the black masses of her hair, and threw herself into a deep
chair. But there was no repose in her attitude. More than once her body
stiffened and she raised her head. Pride and shrewdness forbade her
to leave her door open, and it would be impossible to hear that light
panther-like tread on the heavy carpet of the stair. The front door
might have closed while she was changing in the dressing-room.

Suddenly she heard it slam. Nervous as she was she smiled
reminiscently. Gregory might be soft of foot, but otherwise he was as
noisy as most men. Then the smile froze until her lips were distended
in a grin. Another door had slammed. Gregory was in his own room.

After a few moments she became aware that her body was rigid and that
she was grasping the arms of her chair. She rose with an exclamation of
impatience, but stood with her head bent, listening intently. Suddenly
she swayed a little, once more flooded with that sense of excited
gladness with which guests and chefs had had naught to do: she thought
she heard a door open softly, a light footfall. But her straining
ear-drums had deceived her. The house was as still as a mausoleum.
She pressed her hands against her breast in the gesture the stage has
borrowed from life; her heart felt as if swimming against an undertow.

Then she began pacing up and down. After her habit she tried to arrange
her thoughts by putting them into words, and, as people still do off
the stage, muttered them aloud.

“My God! Do I care as much as that? Do I really _care_? No! No! No!
Any woman of pride, let alone vanity, would make up her mind to bring
her husband back--especially if she could make him as proud of her
as I made him of me tonight. And when he still thinks me beautiful.
What woman wouldn’t? Even if she didn’t have an ounce of any kind of
feeling for him? Men are only interesting when they forget about us in
that purely masculine world where women are warned off the grass. To
lure them back--that is the spice of life in this country. And if one
doesn’t succeed the first time--he may be so tired and sleepy that he’s
forgotten about me--or shy, afraid I’d laugh at him--the world does not
come to an end tonight--What an idiot I am! I made him admire me more
than ever, astonished him--why am I not satisfied for the present?--It
can’t be that I care--that I long for him to come--Good God! I’d rather
be dead than _that_!”

But she went to the door and, laying her ear against it, listened until
she became aware that her lungs were bursting with imprisoned breath.
Then she sank into a chair trembling, her eyes filled with fear. A
moment more and she flung her arms over the table and dropped her face
upon them and broke into heavy weeping.