XIX


Ida was in such high spirits during the luncheon that she managed to be
brilliant and amusing within the limits of her expurgated vocabulary.
Only Ora, who knew her so well, saw the sombre fire in the depths of
her eyes, the sudden twist of her mouth at the corners, noted that
her cheeks were crimson instead of their usual delicate coral, the
occasional clenching of her hands. But she had little time to speculate
upon the cause, for the large party were her guests, and, like any
other Rocky Mountain hostess in the liquid month of June, she feared
the sudden drenching of her tables.

But the day remained fine, and the geologists, who ever since their
arrival in Butte had evinced a remarkable indifference to geology as a
topic for conversation, were as lively as the newspaper men, and deeply
appreciative of the good looks and animated conversation of the four
women who ate almost nothing in their efforts at mental subdivision.
Ora had invited also her engineer and Professor Whalen, placing the
latter as far from Ida as possible; but she saw that he was covertly
watching the woman he must hate. Ida had thrown him a careless nod when
they met by the tables in the grove; and he had returned it with a bow
of surpassing dignity.

Gregory, now that the men of science and of the press had served his
purpose, was eager to be rid of them, and excused himself when the
luncheon was half over, on the plea that he was his own manager and
needed at the mine. He disappeared into the Primo shaft house, as he
often took that short cut to his own shaft, and Mowbray, who had been
silent, for Gregory affected his buoyant spirits unaccountably, moved
his chair up beside Ida and endeavoured to divert her mind from the
general to the specific. But she snubbed him and he relapsed into
gloom. On the train, however, when she saw that Whalen, who was on his
way to Helena to apply for his patent, was watching her, she flirted
pointedly with the handsome Englishman.

The guests were to leave Butte on the seven o’clock train, which,
fortunately for the strain that all were beginning to feel, was only
half an hour late. When it had pulled out and Ida had waved her last
farewell, she walked in silence to her car, and intimated with a
curt nod that Mowbray might take the seat beside her. “But tell Ben
where you want to go,” she said, “for I can’t ask you to dine with me
tonight.”

Mowbray told the chauffeur to drop him at the Club and then asked his
lady, whose animation had dropped to zero, if anything had happened to
annoy her, or if she were merely worn out.

“Don’t ask me any questions,” said Ida sharply. “I’m sorry to seem
inhospitable but I’ve got something to think out. You can go to the
dance at the Country Club.”

“I shall more likely go to my rooms and write letters. Don’t worry
about me. Shall we have a ride tomorrow morning?”

“I don’t know.”

Mowbray was always philosophical about women, having been brought
up with many sisters. “You are tired out,” he said without too much
sympathy. “Just call me up if you feel like doing anything in the
morning.”

“All right. Good night.”

She left him at the Silver Bow Club. Her own house was only a few
blocks distant. She told the maid who admitted her that she wanted no
dinner and should go to bed at once and without assistance. When she
reached the seclusion of her bedroom she locked the door, flung her hat
on the floor and stamped on it, broke several valuable objects, and
then paced up and down, gritting her teeth to keep from screaming.

There was but one person on earth that she hated more than she hated
Gregory Compton and that was herself. She had meant to play a waiting
game of many interviews, in which her fine calculation had mapped out
the insidious approach, the adroit pushing aside of barrier after
barrier, until Gregory returned almost inadvertently to his allegiance.
She had no desire for romantic scenes; they would have embarrassed
herself, and with her instinctive knowledge of man, she knew that
Gregory would shrink back from any situation that might involve
explanations. Nor did she wish to let a man so absorbed as Gregory feel
that he was loved too much, lest he chafe at the thought of feminine
exactions, and his mind continue to dwell upon the delights of freedom.
He might be capable of moments when the woman alone existed, but there
would be long intervals when he would hate a woman’s clinging arms if
they made him ten minutes late for his work, particularly if he was
headed for his beloved mine. Ida, shrewd, self-controlled, watchful,
knew herself, now that her powers were developed, to be the natural
mate for such a man. He would drive a temperamental woman mad.

And she had seemed to make a steady progress. The geologists had
remained for three days in Butte before visiting Perch of the Devil.
On the second evening they had been entertained by the professors of
the School of Mines, but on the other two evenings she had given them
elaborate dinners, and Gregory had attended each. She had seen that he
was increasingly proud of her, and grateful. Upon both occasions they
not only had had a little talk apart but he had drifted back to her
more than once.

And today she had spoiled everything! In the darkness of that mine she
had weakened and made open love to him. She had practically offered
herself--she ground her teeth as she thought of her clinging fingers,
her appealing eyes, her cheek almost brushing his--and he had rejected
her--with consideration, but finality!

If he had knocked her down she would have cherished hope. But in this
hour she had none. His indifference was colossal. The busiest men in
America had their women; she no longer could comfort herself with the
delusion that the mine was a controlling and exclusive passion; she
merely had ceased completely to attract him--and she remembered how
thorough he was; she no more could relight those old fires than she
could blow life into the dead ashes of Big Butte. He would turn to
another woman one of these days; it was not within human possibility
that he would go through life without love; but not to her! not to
her! She would do to entertain his friends, to flaunt his wealth
and advertise his success; in time no doubt he would treat her as a
confidential friend; but sexually she was an old story. It was apparent
that the mere thought bored him; it was only when Gregory was bored
that he was really polite.

If she could but have accepted this, resigned all hope, instead of
subjecting herself to humiliation; she, who had never failed to send
the blood to a man’s head with a glance! She didn’t want to hate him.
She didn’t want to hate herself. Why could she not have been content to
accept the inevitable with philosophy and grace?

The answer that, owing to some mysterious law of her being, she loved
him, made her want to smash everything else in the room; but she would
have some difficulty concealing the present wreckage from her servants,
so she bit her handkerchief to shreds instead.

When the furies had tired her body she fell into a chair and although
her brain was still hot with the blood sent there by excitement and
lack of food, she admitted frankly that the peculiar nature of her
agitation was due to wounded pride and intense mortification; had
she arrived at a point where she no longer could hope, but without
self-betrayal, she might have wept bitter tears, but there still would
have been a secret sweetness in loving him. Now, she growled out her
hatred. She longed to do something to hurt him. If she only were
another sort of woman! She would go to Mowbray’s rooms, go to Helena
with him for a week. And simultaneously she yearned to be consoled, not
only in her heart but in her wounded pride.

Should she ask her husband for a divorce; revenge herself by becoming
an English duchess? Ora, in the moment or two they had found together
at the station, had told her that Mowbray’s older brother was at Davos,
unmistakably dying of tuberculosis, and that his engagement, insisted
upon by his father, had been broken. Valdobia had given her this news
in his last letter, adding the hope that his friend would bring Ida
back with him that they might all be together once more.

Was this the solution of her problem? A marriage that would demonstrate
to Gregory Compton that her moment of seeming weakness was mere
coquetry; a marriage that would raise her an immeasurable social
distance above him; a permanent dissociation from everything that could
remind her of him and this terrible obsession that had disorganised
her being, reduced her to the grovelling level of the women whose
dependence on the favour of man she had always despised?

When she reflected that her revenge would fall flat, Gregory’s not
being the order of mind to appreciate the social pre-eminence of a
titled race, she ground her teeth, again. There was nothing left but
to consider herself. Should she choose the part that not only would
exalt her station and fill her life with the multifarious interests of
a British peeress, but banish this man in time from her memory; or stay
on and alternate torments with moments of indescribable sweetness when
he smiled upon her? And might she not yet manipulate him into her net
if she continued to play the waiting game? Or would she go wholly to
pieces the first time they were alone together?

Her pride strangled at this possibility and brought her to her feet.
The blood was still boiling in her head, she knew what nerves were for
the first time in her life. She made up her mind to go out and walk. In
this part of the town she was not likely to meet anyone.

She found another hat, put on a warm coat, and let herself out of the
house. It was ten o’clock. All the West Side, no doubt, was at the
Country Club.

For a time she walked rapidly and aimlessly, trying to focus her mind
on other things. But when a woman is in love and the path is stony, she
is obsessed much as people are that suffer from shock and reiterate
ceaselessly the circumstances of its cause. Her brain seethed with
hate, longed for revenge. Nothing would have gratified her more than to
take the secret revenge of infidelity. Many a woman has taken a lover
for the satisfaction of laughing to herself at her husband’s dishonour;
to dishonour being the most satisfactory of all vengeance, whether open
or concealed.

She realised abruptly that her thoughts had led her unconsciously to
the door of John Mowbray’s lodgings. The flat had been lent him by a
banker to whom he had brought a letter from his brother, and who had
gone East immediately after his arrival; the banker’s wife lived in
Southern California. It occupied the second story of a house in West
Broadway and had its own entrance on a side street. Mowbray had given a
tea there a day or two before, and Ida had presided.

She did not delude herself for a moment that she could take her
full revenge upon the unconscious Gregory, but at least she could do
something quite shocking, something that would infuriate a husband.
Ida was not afraid of any man, least of all one that wished to make a
duchess of her, but it would be an additional satisfaction to torment
him, and an adventure with a spice of danger in it no doubt would
restore her equilibrium. If Mowbray made violent love to her she felt,
by some obscure process of feminine logic, that she would forgive
Gregory Compton.

She glanced hastily up and down the street, then more sharply,
wondering if she had dreamed that once or twice she had looked over her
shoulder with the sense of being followed. It was a bright moonlight
night. No one was in sight. She rang the bell of Mowbray’s flat. The
door was opened from above. At the head of the stairs stood the Jap who
served as housekeeper and valet.

She hesitated a moment, taken aback. She had forgotten the servant.
Then she closed the door behind her. “Is Lord John in?” she asked
negligently.

The Jap spread out his hands deprecatingly. “His lordship not at home,”
he announced.

Ida hesitated another moment, then ascended the stair and entered the
living-room. “Turn on the lights,” she said, “I shall wait for him.”

The Jap obeyed orders, bowed, and withdrew. For a moment Ida was
tempted to telephone to the Silver Bow Club, but Mowbray was sure to
return soon to write his letters, and she liked the idea of giving him
a surprise. She lit a cigarette, selected a novel from the bookcase,
and sank into the most comfortable of the chairs. The room was warm;
both body and brain were very weary. The cool night air had driven the
blood from her head. She yawned, dropped the book, fell sound asleep.

She awoke as the clock was striking half-past one. She was still alone.
For a moment she stared about her, bewildered, then rose and laughed
aloud.

“This is about the flattest----” She went swiftly out into the hall
and awoke the slumbering Jap. “You little yellow devil,” she cried,
“why didn’t you tell me that his lordship had gone to the party at the
Country Club?”

Once more the Jap was deprecating. “Madam did not ask.”

Ida produced a gold piece. “Well, you are not to tell him that I came,
nor anyone else. If you do I’ll wring your neck.”

The Jap’s eyes, fixed upon the gold, glistened. “Why should I tell?” he
asked philosophically; and having pocketed the coin ran downstairs and
bowed the lady out.

When Ida was about to turn the corner she whirled about, this time
with a definite sensation of being followed. But the street was empty
save for a man slouching down the hill with an unsteady gait, his head
nodding toward his chest. It was a familiar sight in any mining town;
nevertheless she quickened her steps, and in a moment was safe within
her own house.