XVIII


Ora received another budget of Ida’s philosophy on the day before the
Prom; she had taken her a long string of pink coral she had found
among her old possessions, and after Ida had wound it in her hair
and round her neck, and finally tried on her gown, and then draped
Ora successively in various scarves, remnants of her own wedding
finery--being almost as interested in the new complexion as Ora
herself--they had suddenly come to the conclusion that while in Europe
they would assume the mental attitude of girls travelling without a
chaperon. They would see the world from the independent girl’s point
of view, flirt like girls, not like married women (which at least
would save their consciences), force men to accept the phenomenon. For
a time they discussed the superior advantages of being young widows,
but, alluring and even thrilling as were the possibilities evoked, they
dismissed the alternative on the ground that it might prove a bore
always to be on the defensive; man making no secret of his attitude
toward widows. Besides, they felt a delicacy about burying their
indulgent husbands even in mental effigy. As counterfeit girls they
could crowd enough excitement into six months to serve them in memory
during long periods of Butte.

“It will be some bluff,” cried Ida. “And believe me, we’ll have the
time of our lives. And no remorse in mine. I intend to flirt the limit,
for I’m just ready to quit being a mother for a while and see a man’s
eyes kindle when he comes nigh--see him playing about at the end of
a string. I didn’t have near enough of it even when I had half Butte
at my feet--excuse what sounds like conceit but is cold fact. Now,
I’m going to light up every man I take a fancy to. I don’t care an
abandoned prospect hole whether I hurt ’em or not. All they are good
for is to give us a good time.”

“Ida!” Ora was aghast as she often had been before at these naked
feminine revelations. “You talk like a man-eater. I hope to heaven I am
not like that down deep.”

“Oh, maybe you won’t be so bad because you haven’t got as much vanity.
Mine’s insatiable, I guess, and good old Mother Nature taught me the
trick of covering it up with the don’t-care-a-damn air combined with
the come-hither eye. That does the trick. And they get what hurt’s
going. I don’t. You’ll cultivate men, thinking it’s your vanity waked
up, or mere youth, or because it’s time to have a fling, but what
you really are after is the one and only man. The Companion. The
Sympathetic Soul. The Mate. All that rot. He don’t exist, kiddo. He’s
the modern immaculate conception, and he’s generally stillborn; the
bungling doctor being the plain unadulterated male inside of himself.
You’ve got to be your own companion, and if you want happiness you can
get it by expecting just nothing of men. Use them. Throw them on the
ash heap. Pass on to the next. Quit sitting on the watch tower with
your eyes trained on the horizon for the prince that is born and lives
and dies in a woman’s imagination.”

“I have seen happy--united couples--who had been married for years.”

“Oh, yes; some couples are born to jog along together, and some wives
are born man-tamers, and get a lot of satisfaction out of it. But
you’re much too high-falutin’ for that. You’ll always dream of the
impossible--not only in man but of what he’s got to give--which ain’t
much. And I didn’t need all them--those--psychological and problem
and worldly novels you made me read, translated from half a dozen
languages, either. You take my advice, Ora, and don’t start off on any
fool hunt for an ideal. Men are just matter-of-fact two-legged animals,
and as selfish as a few thousand years of fool women have naturally
made them. He does well while he’s courting because he’s naturally good
at bluff. But every bit of romance oozes out of him after he’s eaten
his first breakfast of ham and eggs at home. We can keep up the bluff
forever. Men can’t. Each one of them’s got a kid twin brother inside
that plays marbles till he dies and makes you feel older every day. No,
sir! If I ever had any delusions, I’ve got over them good and plenty.
And I thank the Lord,” she added piously.

“I think that rather adorable, you know: the eternal boy. And I fancy
it is all that saves men from becoming horrors; in this country, at
least--when you consider the unending struggle, and strain, and sordid
business of money getting. They use up all their bluff in the battle of
life, poor things. Why shouldn’t they be natural with us?...”

Ora was recalling this conversation as she sat in her bedroom on the
following evening. Her elemental yet uncannily sophisticated friend
had a way of crashing chords out of jealously hidden nerves, which no
exercise of will could disconnect from the logical parts of the brain.
If it were true that what her now rampant ego, too long starved, really
demanded was man and romance, she wished she had let herself run to
seed until it was too late to reclaim her lost beauty and adventure
into temptation. But a glance into the mirror deprived her of any
further desire to join the vast sisterhood of unattractive females.
Moreover, she had faith in the dominance of her will and common sense,
and if her beauty would help her to the mental contacts she craved with
brilliant and interesting men, far be it from her to execrate it.

She dismissed the mood of self-analysis impatiently and opened her
wardrobe, although half inclined not to attend the Prom. She was
one of the patronesses, but her presence was not essential. It was
pre-eminently the night of nights for young folks--brownies and
squabs--and the absence of a married woman of twenty-six would pass
unrecorded. Not a man in Butte interested her personally, nor was she
in a frame of mind to be interested by any of the too specialised
products of the West. Nor was she inordinately fond of dancing; there
really was no object in going to this party save to witness the début
and possible triumph of her protégée.

But she felt something more than indifference toward this party. It
was as if a gong sounded a warning in the depths of her brain--in her
subconsciousness, perhaps, where instinct, that child of ancestral
experience, dwelt. But even while she hesitated she knew that she
should go, and she took one of her new gowns from a long drawer, and
then began to arrange her hair.

It was now some five months since Miss Ruby Miller had taken her in
hand, and if the young woman’s bank account was heavier her pride as
an artist far outweighed it. Ora’s hair was soft, abundant, the colour
of warm ashes. The skin of her face was as white and transparent,
as “pearly” to use its doctor’s own descriptive word, as the fine
protected surface of her slender throat, her thin but by no means bony
neck. Her lips were pink; they never would be red; and after one taste
of “lip stick,” Ora had declined to have them improved by art. But
they were a soft country-rose pink and suited her clear whiteness far
better than scarlet. Her eyes, never so clear and startling as now,
lighted up the cold whiteness of her face and made her pink mouth look
childish and somewhat pathetic. If her lips had been red, her face
would have had the sinister suggestion so many women achieve with the
assistance of art; as it was she looked by no means harmless as she
smiled at herself in the mirror and coiled her hair softly on the top
of her head. After some experimenting she had decided that she could
not improve upon an arrangement which for the present at least was all
her own.

She rang for Custer to hook her gown. It was a very soft gown of white
satin draped about the bust with lace and chiffon. It was cut to the
waist line in the back and almost as low in front, for her figure was
hardly more developed than a growing girl’s; and it was unrelieved by
colour. She had already put on the string of pearls her mother had
hidden when the other jewels were sold in Paris. Altogether it was a
costume she would not have dared to wear even two months ago, when a
touch of colour on the bodice or in her hair was necessary to divert
attention from her spoiled complexion.

Custer had been her mother’s maid for many years and had returned with
her to Butte. After an interval of employment elsewhere, she had come
to Ora as soon as Mark had built his house. She hooked the gown, pinned
up a stray lock with an invisible hairpin, shook out the little train,
and stood off.

“It reminds me of the way your mother used to look,” she said, “and
you’re even prettier than she was, Miss Ora--now. But I fancy you’ll be
more comfortable in this gown when you wear it in London. These ladies
dress smartly enough, but never as low as the English ladies do,
leastways out here. I fancy it’s the Western men. They don’t seem to
approve of showing too much.”

“Well, I think I’ll rather enjoy startling the natives. Quick--give me
my wrap! I hear Mr. Blake coming. No controversy here.”