XXVIII


Twenty years ago it was the ambition of every Californian, no matter
how blatant his state pride, to move to New York. Today he hopes to
live and die in California, the main reason being that the women of
his family find themselves members of a comparatively old and settled
community, enjoying many advantages and no little importance; given
frequent trips abroad they are content to remain at home in houses
of modern architecture, and to command a social position that New
York has granted to only two or three of California’s heiresses and
millionaires. Montanans, at present, those that are rich or merely
independent, are in the migratory phase of the earlier Californian; but
as New York has extended to them an even more grudging welcome than
it did to aspirants from the more picturesque state, they visit it,
after successive social disappointments, merely for its dressmakers and
those exterior advantages that may be exchanged for gold; the majority
migrate to “The Coast,” more particularly to Southern California. There
they not only find relief on the sea-level from an altitude that plays
havoc with the nerves, but, in the mushroom Southern cities, social
position may be had for the asking, and every advantage for growing
children.

Gregory had heard of a man named Griffiths, owner of the Circle-G
Ranch, a tract of land covering seventy-five thousand acres, who was
anxious to sell and move to Los Angeles. As the ranch was practically
waterless and thirty miles from a railroad, his only chance of
disposing of it was by means of an alluring bargain. He was willing
to sell the ranch, his large herds of horses and cattle, and bands of
sheep for half a million dollars.

Gregory returned to Butte without the engineer, went directly to
Blake’s office, and laid his programme before his astounded friend and
legal adviser.

He had found Griffiths a man unaccustomed to business but with his
mind set upon retiring with a capital of half a million dollars. His
efforts in money-making hitherto, had been confined to acquiring rather
than disposing of property, and his trading consisted of converting
live stock into such cash as was necessary for the purchase of
necessities not raised on his property. But he was nearly sixty, his
wife and four daughters had besought him for years to sell out and take
them to California, and he was now persuaded that he was as tired of
life in the wilds of Montana as they were. He was, however, possessed
of one fixed idea, to leave each of his “women folks” a hundred
thousand dollars when he died. Therefore would he not take a cent less
than five times that amount for his fine property; but although he
inserted the advertisement that had caught Gregory’s eye, so far he had
been unsuccessful. One man found the ranch too far from a railroad,
another no good for farming, save intensive, as it was without a water
supply; still another was willing to pay only a third of the amount
down, with easy terms for the remainder.

“It’s five hundred thousand cold cash,” said Mr. Griffiths to Gregory;
although in a burst of confidence later he had said: “What the dickens
I’m goin’ to do with that great wad of money when I get it beats me! It
turns me cold to think of it.”

Gregory had remained on the ranch two days, inventorying its stock,
buildings, and natural resources. He estimated that seventy-five per
cent. of the property was plow-land, the rest “rough, wooded, and
rolling.” There were several sets of buildings on it, and the cattle
and sheep sheds were in good condition. The cattle, sheep, and horses
could be sold on a rising market for $200,000, thus reducing the cost
of the land to four dollars an acre. After asking and receiving an
option for thirty days, Gregory intimated that he would like to extend
his trip into the mountains in search of float, and hired two riding
horses and a pack horse from his host, besides buying of him the
necessary food supply. Incidentally, in the course of conversation he
learned that there was a river “somewheres in the mountains between
thirty and forty miles northeast.”

He received more minute directions from a prospector regarding this
body of water, which was the object of his trip, and six miles from
Circle-G entered a ravine some twenty-five miles long. After climbing
one of the mountain sides that bounded the ravine, descending and
crossing another gulch, and climbing again, he and his companion saw,
far below, between the narrow walls of a cañon, an abundant mountain
stream.

The engineer proposed to divert this body of water to Circle-G Ranch.
Through the nearest mountain side he should drive a tunnel six hundred
feet long, and cross the short and crooked ravine with a thousand
feet of flume to a point where it would be necessary to drive another
tunnel, about two hundred feet in length. This would conduct the
diverted body of water into the long ravine, down which it would flow
to a point six miles above the ranch. Here the engineer purposed to
construct a dam thirty feet high for the purpose of raising the water
to an elevation from which it would flow through a canal or “ditch”, to
the more level portions of the ranch. A rough estimate of the cost of
this project, from headworks to ditch was $300,000.

He returned to Circle-G, told Mr. Griffiths that he had found no float,
but nevertheless liked the neighbourhood and was inclined to buy the
ranch and sell it in small farms to settlers. He would return to Butte
and think it over. If he concluded to buy he would pay a half million
dollars in cash, and, if Mr. Griffiths were agreeable borrow back
$300,000, for improvements, giving a mortgage at seven per cent. on
the forty thousand acres he proposed to make attractive for settlers.
He gave no hint of his irrigation project. Griffiths had known of this
body of water, but it had never occurred to him nor to anyone else to
divert it. He was a stock-grower, pure and simple, with no “modern
notions”, and Gregory had no intention of enlarging his vision. He
would pay the man his price, but he had the ruthlessness of his type.

He had more than one motive for offering to borrow back $300,000 of the
payment money; not only should he need it at once, but he feared, after
Mr. Griffiths’ confidence, and knowing his kind, that the old man would
withdraw in terror at the last moment, preferring the safe monotonies
of his ranch to the unknown responsibilities of a capitalist; like
others he had heard that it is sometimes easier to get money than to
invest it. Gregory told him to think it over and write to the Daly and
Clark Banks in Butte, and to the National Bank of Montana, in Helena,
for information regarding his own standing and financial condition. He
left the entire family in as hopeful a frame of mind as himself.

On confirmation of the report that forty thousand acres could be put
under water by gravity, he should close the deal at once, file a notice
of appropriation for forty thousand miner’s inches of water, and begin
work on the first tunnel. He then intended to lay the matter before
one of the great land selling organisations of Chicago or New York,
proposing that he be paid $1,400,000 for the forty thousand acres of
irrigated land, subject to mortgage; demonstrating that the land so
purchased for thirty-five dollars an acre (or forty-three and a half
dollars including the mortgage) could readily be sold to settlers
for one hundred, if railroad facilities were provided. As a further
inducement, to cover the cost of railroad construction, he would
execute a deed and place it in escrow, as a guarantee and evidence of
good faith, and accompanied by a contract authorising the land selling
company to dispose of the remaining thirty-five thousand acres at ten
dollars an acre. The construction of the railroad would add materially
to the value of the unirrigated land also, and a pledge of this portion
of the property as security that the railroad would be built would be
acceptable, because the estimated cost, with liberal allowances, was
under $350,000.

The sum paid him by the land selling company would, in addition to the
large sum realised by the sale of the live stock, give him at least
$1,600,000, or $1,100,000 over the half million originally invested.

Mark listened with his eyes and mouth wide open.

“By George!” he exclaimed, when Gregory finished. “Did you dope all
that out yourself? That’s the talk of a man who’s been in the land
business for years. How did you ever think of it?”

“What’s a man’s brain given to him for--to turn round in a circle? Do
you find the plan feasible?”

“It’s feasible all right--given a cold half million in hand and brains
behind it--plus imagination. That’s where you win out. You’ll be the
richest man in Montana yet.”

“I intend to be.”

“And the first man born here to make one of the old-time fortunes.”

“I hadn’t thought of that!”

Mark dismissed enthusiasm and put his own astute brain to work.

“The hitch will be with your land selling company. They might be
dazzled, even convinced, but they’re cold-blooded, and they never have
any too much cash on hand. What special line of argument do you propose
to hand out?”

“Several. I didn’t go to the Circle-G Ranch without making certain
investigations beforehand. In the first place Government statistics
prove the productivity of Montana soil without irrigation. I am not the
first to discover that this same soil when irrigated is insured against
crop failure. In the second place a study of the U. S. Government
reclamation projects convinced me that I could, all things being
favourable (such as water supply and gravity), put a large tract of
land under water at a very small cost compared to the cost under the
plan of procedure adopted by the Government. By the plan I have mapped
out I can sell both land and water for less than the cost of water
alone under the Government direction. But I have a final inducement
which I believe will bring the selling company to terms. Those forty
thousand acres when irrigated will be peculiarly adapted to the growing
of seed peas. This is the best soil in the country for peas. Now the
seed houses of the country are in great need of large quantities
of seed peas, and the selling company could easily interest these
concerns to the extent of securing their financial backing. They would
no doubt buy large blocks themselves. Such an opportunity has never
been offered them--forty thousand acres under the ditch, and adequate
railroad service. This will enable the selling company to raise an
initial payment to me of $200,000. And if I guarantee the ditch and the
railroad they are in a position to make the same guarantee to settlers
to whom they may make sales in a retail way. They’ll have no difficulty
getting $100 an acre retail; and the seed houses no doubt would invest
and become real owners, thus saving the profit now paid to farmers who
grow for them under contract. Got it?”

“I get you. But why put all of your own money into the ranch? Ora has
taken something like half a million out of that mine. I could let you
have that.”

“I’ll risk no woman’s money. Of course I shouldn’t put my own in if I
didn’t believe it to be a dead sure thing, but there’s always risk.” He
took a packet of papers from his overcoat pocket. “Here are the option
and abstract of titles. I wish you would examine them. Say nothing of
all this at present--nor for a long time after. I’ll spring it when
I’m ready--which will be after I’ve disposed of the irrigated land.
Will you go out with me when I return to Circle-G? I shall want you to
attend to the details of sale and to the location of the water rights.”

“I’ll go all right. And I’m only living to see what you’ll do next.”