XV


“I wonder!” thought Ora, “I wonder!”

It was some four months after her first séance with Miss Ruby Miller.
There was no question of the improvement in her looks, owing, perhaps,
as much to a new self-confidence as to the becoming arrangement of
her hair and the improved tint and texture of her skin. The tonic and
a less reckless diet had also done their work; her eyes were even
brighter, her lips pink. Moreover, it was patent that the sudden
reformation was as obvious to Butte as to herself. Women confessed to a
previous fear that the “altitude had got on her nerves or something”;
as for the men, they may or may not have observed the more direct
results of Miss Miller’s manipulations, but it was not open to doubt
that her new interest in herself had revived her magnetism and possibly
doubled it.

Ora turned from the mirror in her bedroom, where she had been regarding
her convalescing beauty with a puzzled frown, and stared down at the
rough red dirt of her half-finished street--she lived far to the west.
Her eyes travelled up to the rough elevation upon which stood the
School of Mines in its lonely splendour, then down to the rough and
dreary Flat. It stretched far to the south, a hideous expanse, with its
dusty cemetery, its uninviting but not neglected road houses, its wide
section given over to humble dwellings, with here and there a house of
more pretensions, but little more beauty. It was in one of these last,
no doubt, that her father had kept his mistress, whose children, she
was vaguely aware, attended the public schools under his name. These
houses, large and small, were crowded together as if pathetically
conscious that the human element must be their all, in that sandy,
treeless, greenless waste.

There was something pathetic, altogether, thought Ora, in the bright
eagerness with which even the wealthy class made the most of their
little all. They were so proud of Columbia Gardens, a happy-go-lucky
jumble of architectures and a few young trees, a fine conservatory and
obese pansies on green checkers of lawn; they patronised its Casino so
conscientiously on Friday nights when the weather would permit. During
the winter, they skated on their shingled puddle down on The Flat as
merrily and thankfully as though it were the West End of London or
one of the beautiful lakes in one of the beautiful German “gartens.”
They motored about the hideous environs, and hung out of the car to
emphasise their rapture at the lonely tree or patch of timid verdure;
they entertained royally in their little Club House, out in another
desolate waste, or played golf without envy or malice. In short they
resolutely made the most of Butte when they were in it; they patted
Butte and themselves on the back daily; they loved it and they were
loyal to it and they got out of it as often as they possibly could.

“And I!” thought Ora, with a sense of panic. “I, who will probably get
away every five years or so--what am I waking up for--to what end? I
wonder!”

She walked slowly downstairs and, avoiding the little French
drawing-room, went into the library and sat down among her books.
Sash curtains of a pale canary colour shut out the rough vacant lots
and ugly dwellings above her home, and cast a mellow glow over the
brown walls and rows of calf-bound books. Judge Stratton had read
in four modern languages and two dead ones. The love of reading, of
long evenings alone in his deserted “mansion,” had been as striking
a characteristic of his many-sided ego as his contempt for moral
standards. Ora, who had grown into a slow but fairly thorough knowledge
of her father’s life and character, permitted her thoughts to flow
freely this afternoon and to speculate upon what her life might have
been had Judge Stratton been as upright as he was intellectually
gifted; if her mother had possessed the brains or charm to keep him
ensnared; if she herself had been left, an orphan at twenty, with the
fortune she inevitably would have inherited had her father behaved
himself--instead of finding herself penniless, ignorant of all
practical knowledge, a querulous invalid on her hands, her only suitor
the “hustling” son of her mother’s old seamstress.

Ora admitted no disloyalty to Mark as she put these questions for
the first time squarely to herself. She intended to continue to treat
him with unswerving friendship, to give him all the assistance in her
power, as long as she lived. And, as husbands went, she made no doubt
that he was one to thank her grudging providence for. But that she
would have considered him for a moment had she inherited the fortune
her father had made and dissipated was as likely as that she would have
elected to live her life in Butte.

She knew Mark’s ambitions. Washington was his goal, and he was by no
means averse from being governor of his state meanwhile. Nor would he
have been a genuine American boy, born in the traditional log cabin--it
had been a log cabin as a matter of fact--if he had not cherished
secret designs on the White House. In all this, did it prove to be more
or less, she could be of incalculable assistance to him. And she was
the more determined to render this assistance because she had accepted
his bounty and was unable to love him.

She concluded with some cynicism that the account would be squared,
being by no means blind to what she had done for him already in the
way of social position and prestige; still, it was not only his right,
but a penance demanded by her self-respect. She was living the most
unidealistic life possible to a woman of her pride and temperament, but
she would redeem it as far as lay in her power.

She moved impatiently, her brows puzzled again, and something like
fear in her heart. What did this slow awakening portend? Why had she
instinctively held it back with all her strength, quite successfully
until her new-born vanity, with its infinite suggestions, had quickened
it suddenly into imperious expression?

Certainly she was conscious of no desire for a more idealistic union
with another man. If she had inherited a fortune, she would have
married no one; not then, at all events; nothing had been further from
her desire. She would have lived in Europe and travelled in many lands.
Beyond a doubt her hunger for the knowledge that lies in books would
have been satiated long since, never would have assumed a discrepant
importance. She would be uniformly developed, and she would have met
many men. With the double passport of birth and wealth, added to the
fine manner she owed to her Southern mother, her natural vivacity and
magnetism, and a physical endowment that she now knew could have been
trained into positive beauty, she would have had her pick of men. And
when a woman may choose of the best, with ample time at her disposal,
it was incredible that the true mate, the essential companion, should
not be found before it was too late. Most marriages are makeshifts; but
for the fortunate few, with the intelligence to wait, and the developed
instinct to respond, there was always the possibility of the perfect
union.

Ora made a wry face at this last collocation. She had no yearning for
the “perfect union.” Matrimony had been too unutterably distasteful.
She turned hastily from the subject and recalled her father’s
impassioned desire that she should make the West her home, her career,
marry a Western man, give him and her state the benefit of her
endowments and accomplishments. Possibly, surfeited with Europe, she
would have returned to Montana to identify herself with its progress,
whether she married or not. She was artistic by temperament and
training, and correspondingly fastidious; she cordially detested all
careers pursued by women outside those that were the natural evolution
of an artistic gift. But she could have built herself an immense and
splendid house, filled it with the most exquisite treasures American
money could coax from the needy aristocracy of Europe, and have a
famous salon; invite the pick of the artistic, literary, musical,
and political world to visit her for weeks or months at a time,
house parties of a hundred or more, and so make her state famous for
something besides metals, intensive farming, and political corruption.
No one could deny that the state would benefit exceedingly.

Conceivably, in time she would take a husband, assuredly one of high
ambitions and abilities, one whose fortunes probably would take him to
Washington.

This brought her back to Mark, and she laughed aloud. She had been
romancing wildly; of late she had grudgingly admitted that nature may
have composed her to be romantic after she had recovered from the
intellectual obsession; and the circle had brought her round to her
husband! He was “forging ahead” with extraordinary rapidity. She made
no doubt that he would be a millionaire within the ten years’ limit
he had set himself. Nor would he rely alone upon his legal equipment
and the many opportunities to exercise it when a man was “on the job
all the time”; he watched the development of Montana’s every industry,
new and established. He “bought in on the ground floor,” gambled
discreetly in copper, owned shares in several new and promising mines,
and property on the most picturesquely situated of the new lakes
constructed for power supply. He invested what he could afford, and
with the precision of the man on the spot. Yes, he would be one of
the Western millionaires, even if not one of the inordinate ones, and
before his ten years had passed, if no untoward event occurred.

And it was on the cards that she would have her own fortune before
long. She knew that Mark (who had her power of attorney) had made
better terms with the engineers than he had anticipated, and he dropped
mysterious hints which, knowing his level head, made her indulge in
ornate dreams now and again. But he only smiled teasingly when she
demanded a full explanation, and told her that she would realise how
good or how bad her mine was when she went to the bank to sign her
letter of credit.

For one thing she felt suddenly grateful. She knew that the mine had
been leased for a year only and without bond. If, during that time it
“panned out,” she would stipulate to mine it herself when the contract
expired.

She sat up very straight and smiled. That was what she would have
liked! If her father had but willed her this mine and capital enough to
work it alone! Her fingers fluttered as they always did when handling
ore; she had wondered before if the prospector’s fever were in her
blood. How she should have enjoyed watching the rock come up in the
buckets as the shaft sank foot by foot, until they struck the vein;
always expecting chambers of incredible richness, gold, copper, silver.
She would even learn to do the pleasant part of her own assaying; and
she suddenly experienced an intense secretive jealous love for this
mine that was hers and in which might be hidden shining blocks of
those mysterious primary deposits deep in the sulphide zone; forced up
through the veins of earth, but born how or where man could only guess.
It was a mystery that she wanted to feel close to and alone with, far
in the winding depths of her mine.

She got up and moved about impatiently. Her propensity to dream
extravagantly was beginning to alarm her, and she wished uneasily that
she could discover the gift to write and work it off. Where would
it lead her? But she would not admit for a moment that her released
imagination, pulsing with vitality, and working on whatever she fed it,
only awaited the inevitable moment when it could concentrate on the one
object for which the imagination of woman was created.

The pendulum swung back and more evenly. She told herself it was both
possible and probable that she had a good property, however short it
might fall of Butte Hill. She renewed her determination to mine it
herself, and work, work, work. Therein lay safety. The future seemed
suddenly full of alarms.

And there was Mark, his career, his demands, dictated not so
insistently by him as by herself.

Ora’s soul rose in a sudden and desperate revolt beside which her
rising aversion from unmitigated intellect was a mere megrim. She
felt herself to be her father’s daughter in all her newly-opened
aching brain-cells. He had lived his life to please himself, and if
his temptations and weaknesses might never be hers--how could she
tell?--his intense vitality survived in her veins, his imperious
spirit, his scornful independence. She glanced at the rows of
calf-bound books he had handled so often. Something of his sinister
powerful personality seemed to steal forth and encompass her, sweep
through the quickened corridors of her brain. Mark Blake was not the
man he would have chosen for his daughter. Western, Mark might be to
the core, but he was second-rate, and second-rate he would remain no
matter what his successes.

And, she wondered, what would this proud ambitious parent, whose
deepest feeling had been for his one legitimate child, say to her plan
to play second fiddle for life to a man of the Mark Blake calibre? He
had wanted her to marry in the West, but he had been equally insistent
that she should develop a personality and position of her own. No
devoted suffragist could have been a more ardent advocate of woman’s
personal development than Judge Stratton had been where his daughter
was concerned. To the rights of other women he had never cast a
thought.

This was the hour of grim self-avowal. She admitted what had long moved
in the back of her mind, striving toward expression, that she hated
herself for having married any man for the miserable reason that has
driven so many lazy inefficient women into loveless marriages. She
should have gone to work. More than one of her father’s old friends
would have given her a secretaryship. She could have lived on her
little capital and taken the four years’ course at the School of Mines,
equipping herself for a congenial career. If that had not occurred to
her she could have taught French, Italian, German, dancing, literature.
In a new state like Montana, with many women raised abruptly from
the nethermost to the highest stratum, there was always a longing,
generally unfulfilled, for the quick veneer; and women of older
fortunes welcomed opportunities to improve themselves. She could have
taken parties to Europe.

She had played the coward’s part and not only done a black injustice to
herself but to Mark Blake. He was naturally an affectionate creature,
and, married to a comfortable sweet little wife, he would have been
domestic and quite happy. In spite of his enjoyment of his club, his
cards and billiards, and his buoyant nature, she suspected that he was
wistful at heart. He was intensely proud of his wife, in certain ways
dependent upon her, but she knew he had taken for granted that her
girlish coldness would melt in time and womanly fires kindle. Well,
they never would for him, poor Mark. And possessing an inherent sense
of justice, she felt just then more sympathy for him than for herself,
and placed all his good points to his credit.

She was conscious of no sympathy for herself, only of that deep
sense of puzzlement, disturbance, apprehension. Revolt passed.
Indications--the abrupt bursting into flower of many unsuspected bulbs
in her inner garden: softness, sympathy, a more spontaneous interest
in and response to others, the tendency to dream, vague formless
aspirations--had hinted, even before she took her new-born vanity to
Miss Ruby Miller, that she was on the threshold of one of the dangerous
ages (there are some ten or fifteen of them), and that unless she
had the doubtful wisdom and resolution to burn out her garden as the
poisonous fumes of roasting ores had blasted the fruitful soil of
Butte, she must prepare to face Life, possibly its terrible joys and
sorrows.

She sprang to her feet and ran upstairs and dressed for the street. At
least she had one abiding interest and responsibility, Ida Compton. She
was a self-imposed and absorbing duty, and always diverting.