XXXI


They finished their letters and went up to their rooms to rest, for
they had “done” several churches and the Campo Santo during the morning.

“Thank the lord,” said Ida, as they walked up the stairs after waiting
ten minutes for the lift, “there are no picture galleries in this
town that one _must_ see. The rest of the programme is streets and
architecture, which is worth while. These internal streets make me feel
as if I were going right through to China, or whatever is underneath
Italy. Genoa, before it had any houses on it, must have looked like
Last Chance Gulch, Helena, Montana.”

They had reached their connecting rooms. Ida extended herself on a
sofa, Ora made herself as comfortable as possible in a chair and lit a
cigarette.

“Say, kid,” pursued Ida, “you smoke too much. Follow my illustrious
example. I go just so far and no farther--one cigarette after each meal
because it makes me feel nice and aristocratic. You’re the kind that
lets a habit run away with you. I deliberate. You drift. See?”

Ora laughed. “Funny thing, nature! Anyone would say quite the opposite
of each of us.”

“It’s like life. Not a blooming thing is just what you figure it out
beforehand. Here I wanted the Collins house and I’ve got the Murphy.
And Greg, that I figured on being a millionaire by the time I got back,
has gone and tied himself up in litigation, or is heading that way.”

“You ungrateful wretch! You came to Europe ‘figuring’ on making a
thousand dollars serve for the entire trip and you already have had
eleven thousand. Most rules work both ways. But you don’t really want
to go back?”

“I do. It’s been growing for some time and now it’s ingrowing. You can
get enough of anything and I’ve had enough of Europe. Besides, I’d
like to get back to a country where lifts are elevators and don’t go
to sleep a few times on the way up; where it doesn’t take an hour to
draw a bath, which it does wherever it’s pronounced băth; where you can
drink plain water, and don’t have cheese or garlic or grease in all
your food; where you are never taken for what you ain’t; where you are
never cheated and overcharged because you’re an American; where you
don’t have to see a sight a minute; where you don’t have to talk up to
people who don’t give a hang about anything that interests you; where
you are not looked upon as a rank outsider by ancient aristocrats and
concierges, no matter how polite they try to be; and where the word
democracy means what it is. Over here every socialist--I’ll bet every
anarchist--would give his front teeth to be a king, a duke, or even
a rich bourgeois. That’s what’s the matter with all of them. Give me
America, above all, old Montana. A little money and a lot of ‘go’ are
all you need out there.”

“Oh, Ida! Ida! will you never appreciate the glory of Europe? Is that
all you have got out of it?”

“I’ve squeezed it dry, all right, and I’ll take back a lot more than
I figured on. Watch me when I’m swelling round Butte, imitating the
chaste simplicity of a British duchess--minus the duds they generally
sport. There’s nothing like Europe to teach you what’s what--especially
the way we’ve seen it--put you wise in ten thousand different ways, and
fill your mind with pretty pictures--that ain’t in galleries. But after
all it’s just a course in the higher education, and you’re outside
of it all, every minute. To live you’ve got to go back to your own
country.”

“That’s true enough!”

“Could you marry a European and live over here for the rest of your
life and never see those mountains again that just seem to belong to
you--or even screaming old Butte?”

“No!” Ora spoke with uncommon vehemence. “I couldn’t!”

Ida raised herself on her elbow and looked at her friend shrewdly. “I
can’t see that you’ve enjoyed yourself so much over here. It seems to
me that you’ve got your fun out of showing me round. You had more real
gaiety in you in Butte. You may not know it but you look pretty sad
sometimes.”

“Life is sad--mighty sad.”

“Is it? That’s a new one for me. I think it a pretty fine old
proposition. What went wrong with you--early in the game?”

“Nothing. Travel is tiring, I’m not as strong as you are.”

“You’re as tough as a pine knot, for all you look like a lily expecting
to be decapitated by the first wind. Well, you won’t tell if you won’t,
but I’ll tell you what you need. You’ve never been in love and that’s
a sort of ache in women until they’ve taken a good dose of the only
medicine. I rather hoped you’d met your fate in the Marchese Valdobia.
He’s the sort you once told me was your type, and you seemed to like
him pretty well for about five weeks in Rome. The lord knows he was
tall enough, and dark enough, and thin enough, and looked as if he had
a beastly temper besides. Then you turned him down good and hard. I was
sorry----”

“My dear Ida! Are you regretting that I did not have a liaison with
Valdobia? I remember your virtuous sentiments in Butte. Perhaps it is
time for us to return!”

“Oh, I’m all right. But I’m that advanced I wouldn’t mind you having an
affair the least bit if it would make you happy----”

“Happy! What happiness do you imagine there can be when you are
absolutely at the mercy of a man?--when you never know whether you will
see him again or not?--a woman has no real hold on a lover. Matrimony
with the man you love may have its agonies, but at least you live with
him, you make his home; his interests are yours, he is dependent upon
you for comfort and sympathy; there are a thousand ways in which you
can endear and enchain him. But a lover, whom you meet in secret for
one purpose only, who can give you no real companionship--oh, no! I
shall not court that particular form of suffering. Life is hard enough
without that! I’ve known women with lovers and so have you.”

“I don’t say it would last forever; nothing does, for that matter. But
at least you would live for a little while--come down off the unearthly
plane you roost on now. Whatever you went through, it would leave you
all-round developed and philosophical--in a frame of mind to see and
accept life as it is. You need hardening. I was born hard. You’re as
soft as mush, for all you look like those marble bores in the Vatican,
and as romantic as if you’d spent all your life in a castle in a wood
with the drawbridge up. I believe you even keep a diary----”

“Diary----” Ora sat up straight.

“I’ve seen and heard you writing by the yard, late at night, mostly. It
wasn’t letters, because we always get those off our chest just after
breakfast--fine system. Unless you’re a budding author----”

“They were letters!” Ora, who was strung up to a high pitch and merely
smoking for relief, felt a defiant impulse to indulge in the impudence
of confession. “I’ve written yards and yards of letters to a man----”

“What? And you don’t send them off!”

“I don’t know him.”

“Good lord, what next? An ideal, I suppose.”

“Yes--that’s it.”

“Do you mean you never saw him--anyone to suggest him--it? What gender
has an ideal, anyhow?”

“I saw him--talked with him, once. I said I didn’t know him.”

“And you’re in love with him!”

“Not in the least. He simply jolted my imagination, gave me the idea of
what might be--have been. I--it is hard to express--I feel in a sort
of mental--spiritual?--affinity with him. When I write I have a queer
sense of absolute communion--as if we were talking--I suppose it is
because I know he would understand if I could send the letters----”

“And you’ve never sent one?”

“Of course not. It is--well, just a little private one-sided drama I’m
living; a sort of book of which I am the heroine. While I write I am
alive. The rest of the time I wonder what I was put on this earth at
all for.”

“Look at here, Ora, the best thing we can do is to send for old Gower
and go back to Rome. You’ll be having nerves first thing you know.
No, we’d cut out the annex. I’m dead sick of her, and everybody knows
we’re all right; in Rome they don’t care, anyhow. You could have a real
romance. We’d take one of those old palaces, haunted, moth-eaten, with
one of those antique porters that looks as if he’d let out midnight
lovers ten centuries ago, and beds that twenty centuries have died in.
That would just suit you. I’d enjoy a second-hand romance first rate,
and be the trusted friend.”

“Ida, you are incorrigible! Even if I cared a penny about Valdobia do
you suppose I would betray my husband?”

“Rats! Don’t you suppose Mark has a girl down on The Flat? Greg has,
I’ll bet--well, don’t look as if you were going to faint. What’s the
use of being a dog in the manger? Mark’ll be the same old devoted when
you get back.”

“Oh, do keep quiet! And I wish I might never see Butte again. I think
I’ll write to Mark and ask him to move to New York. He now has plenty
of money to wait, and it wouldn’t take him long to establish himself
anywhere----”

“I thought you loved Montana--wanted to do something big for her----”

“We’ve been away a long time. I fancy I’m weaned. It is only once in a
while that I feel a pull--merely because I was born there.”

“Well, Mark won’t leave, believe me. He’s Western from the cut of his
back hair to his love of the free-and-easy. No New York for him except
the all-night two or three times a year. Butte’s your fate unless you
leave him.”

“I’ll never do that, but I’d like to stay over here for another year
or two. Remember, I was brought up in Europe--and--and--I _might_ meet
the man--If you want to know I’ve tried. I’d never go as far as you
suggest, but I could get something--companionship, perhaps, out of it.”

“When you meet the man you’ll forget all you ever knew, and men don’t
companion for a cent when there’s nothing in it. I haven’t been turning
them inside out these last six months for nothing; what I don’t
know about men wouldn’t fill a thimble. Why don’t you round up your
letter-man?”

“That is forever impossible.”

“Do give me a hint who he is. I’m half dead with curiosity. Where’d you
meet him?”

“Keep quiet. I’m going to take a nap.”

“Well,” said Ida, yawning and stretching herself, “so am I, if you’ve
closed up. When we get back to Butte and there’s no more sight-seeing
on, we’ll have to cut out these siestas or we’ll get fat, and then
good-bye.”