XXI


Gregory and Mark established their wives comfortably in a drawing-room
of the limited for Chicago, asked the usual masculine questions about
tickets and trunk checks, expressed their masculine surprise that
nothing had been forgotten, told them to be careful not to lean over
the railing of the observation car, nor to make themselves ill with the
numerous boxes of candy sent to the train, admonished them not to spend
too much money in New York, to send their trunks to the steamer the day
before they sailed, and give themselves at least two hours to get to
the docks; above all not to mislay their letters of credit; then kissed
them dutifully, and, as the train moved out, stood on the platform with
solemn faces and hearts of indescribable buoyancy.

“My Lord!” exclaimed Ida, as she blew her last kiss. “If Greg was going
along I’d have to take care of him every step of the way. I wouldn’t
trust him with the tickets the length of the train. Men do make me
tired. They keep up the farce that we’re children just to keep up that
other grand farce that they run the Universe. Any old plank to cling
to.”

Ora kept her sentiments to herself.

If Mark, who was fond of his wife, and more or less dependent upon her,
wondered vaguely that he should rejoice in the prospect of six months
of bachelorhood, Gregory was almost puzzled. Ida was now no more to him
personally than a responsibility he had voluntarily assumed and was
determined to treat with complete justice; but at least she made him
more comfortable than he had ever been before, and he had trained her
to let him alone. Since her rapid improvement her speech had ceased
to irritate him; she was never untidy, never anything but a pleasant
picture to look at. He had also noted on the night of the party that
she was indisputably the handsomest woman in the room and received the
homage of men with dignity and poise. He had felt proud of her, and
comfortably certain that he could trust her. Altogether a model wife.

Nevertheless as he walked out Park Street after he left Mark at his
office (Ida not only had sent his personal possessions to the Blake
house but found time to unpack and put them away) his brain, which
had been curiously depressed during the past week, felt as if full of
effervescing wine.

“Jove!” he thought, “why do men marry? What has any woman living to
give a man half as good as his freedom.”

His freedom was to be reasonably complete. He had told Ida to expect
no letters from him and not to write herself unless she were in
trouble. With all the fervour of his masculine soul he hated to write
letters. Long since he had bought a typewriter, on which he rattled off
necessary business communications so briefly that they would have cost
him little more on the wire. He knew that he should hear constantly of
his wife’s welfare from Mark, and had no desire to be inflicted with
descriptions of scenery and shops.

He felt a spasm of envy, however, as he thought of the letters Mark
would receive from Ora. _Her_ letters, no doubt, would be worth
reading, not only because she had a mind, and already had seen too much
of Europe to comment on its obvious phases, but because they would be
redolent of her subtle exquisite personality. He had once come upon a
package of old letters among his mother’s possessions and read them.
They had been written by his great-great-grandmother to her husband
while he was a soldier in the War of the Revolution. It was merely the
simple life of the family, the farm, and the woods, that she described,
but Gregory never recalled those letters without feeling again the
subtle psychological emanation of the writer’s sweet and feminine but
determinate personality; it hovered like a wraith over the written
words, imprisoned, imperishable, until the paper should fall to dust.
So, he imagined, something of Ora’s essence would take wing on the
rustling sheets of her letters.

But the spasm of envy passed. Ora would write no such letters to Mark
Blake. Her correspondence with her husband would be perfunctory,
practical, brief. To some man she might write pages that would keep him
up at night, reading and rereading, interpreting illusive phrases,
searching for hidden and personal meanings, while two individualities
met and melted.... But this yearning passed also. To receive such
letters a man must answer them and that would be hell.

He was on his way to change his clothes for overalls and get his blue
dinner pail, well filled, from Custer. But before he reached the house
he conceived an abrupt and violent distaste for life underground, an
uncontrollable desire--or one which he made no effort to control--for
long rides over the ranch, and a glimpse of Limestone Hill. It was
seven months since he had seen his ranch save in snatches, and he
wanted it now for months on end. He was not a town-bred man, and he
suddenly hated the sight of Butte with her naked angles and feverish
energies. He realised also that his mind insistently demanded a rest.
To be sure he had intended to work in the mines for eight hours of the
day, but he had planned to study for ten. Well, he would have none
of it! Caprice was no characteristic of his, but he felt full of it
this brilliant morning. If the air was so light in Butte that his feet
seemed barely to touch the ground, so clear that the mountains seemed
walking down the valley, what must it be in the country?

He went rapidly to the house, left a message for Mark, packed a
suit-case and took the next train for Pony. There he hired a horse and
rode to his ranch.

One of the sudden June rains had come while he was in the train. It
had ceased, but a mass of low clouds brushing the higher tree tops
was almost black. Their edges were silver: they were filled with a
cold imprisoned sunlight, which transformed the distant mountains into
glass, transparent, with black shadows in their depths. Montana looked
as giving an exhibition of her astral body. But as he rode the clouds
drifted away, the sky deepened to the rich voluptuous blue of that
high altitude; even the grey soil showing through the thin grass of
the granite hills looked warmer. Where the soil was thicker the ground
was covered with a gorgeous tapestry of wildflowers; the birds sang
desperately as if they knew how short was their springtime, affected
like mortals by the thin intoxicating air. Even the waters in the creek
roared as if making the most of their brief span. The mountains lost
their glassy look; blue, ice-topped, they were as full of young and
vivid life as when they danced about, heedless that the heaving earth
purposed they should wait for centuries before settling into things
of beauty for unborn man to admire. They never will look old, those
mountains of Montana; man may take the treasure from their veins and
the jewels from their crowns, but they drink forever the elixir of the
air. The blue dawn fills their spirit with a deathless exultation, the
long blue-gold days their bodies with immortal life, the starry nights,
swinging their lamps so close to the snow fields, unroll the dramas
of other worlds. They are no mere masses of rock and dirt or even of
metal, these mountains of Montana, but man’s vision of eternal youth.

Gregory drew rein on the crest of one of his own hills. Below lay
the De Smet ranch, and he drew a long breath with that sensation of
serene pride which comes to men when they contemplate their landed
possessions, or their wives on state occasions. All the arable soil,
on flat and hillside, was green; alfalfa, with its purple flowers,
filled the bottoms; the winter wheat was rippling in the wind; the
acres covered with the tender leaves of young flax were like a densely
woven lawn. On the hills and the public range roamed his cattle. All of
this fair land, including its possible treasure, was his, absolutely.
By the terms of his father’s will he paid yearly dividends from the
sale of steers and crops to three aunts, now reduced to two. Whether by
accident or design, Mr. Compton had omitted all mention of “minerals
under the earth.” Gregory had not the least objection to making these
ladies rich, when his mines yielded their wealth, but he was jealous
of every acre of his inheritance, far more of its secrets. All the
passionate intensity of his nature he had poured out on his land and
its subterranean mysteries, and he would have hailed an invention which
would enable him to dismiss every man from his employ. But his head was
hard and he always smiled grimly at the finish of his fanciful desires.

He turned his horse toward the distant group of farm buildings, then
wheeled abruptly and rode toward Limestone Hill. He had anticipated a
long talk with the enthusiastic Oakley on the subject of crops, but he
suddenly realised that he was in no mood to talk to anyone and that his
secret reason for coming to the ranch was to visit his hill. Oakley
would cling to him for hours. One glance had assured him that the crops
would have satisfied a state experimental farm. Mining would fascinate
him in its every detail, but as far as agriculture was concerned, he
was interested only in results.

As he rode toward the hill he frowned at the signs of activity on
the other side of his boundary line. A large gasoline hoist had
been installed. The waste dump was almost as high as a hill, four
“double-sixes”--six-horse teams--stood waiting to be loaded from the
ore bins. There were a group of miners’ cabins, a long mess-house, and
a blacksmith’s shop. This was the only shadow on his future: he wanted
no lawsuits, nor did he want to enter into partnership with anyone, not
even Ora Blake.

But he dismissed the matter from his mind, tied his horse, and,
although Montanans are a slow race on foot out of deference to the
altitude, ran up the hill. A glance told him that his secret was
undiscovered. He knelt down and dug up the float, his heart hammering.
And then he deliberately let the prospector’s fever take possession of
him. The soles of his feet prickled as if responding to the magnets
below; he had a fancy that gold, molten, was running through his veins.
But his brain worked clearly. He was aware that his exultation and
excitement were not due to the lure of gold alone, but to the still
more subtle pleasure that a strong and obstinate nature feels in
breaking a vow and deliberately succumbing to temptation. He had vowed
in good faith that he would not open his mine until the third of June
of the following year. But a week before he had spent an enchanted hour
with a woman, and during the rest of that night--he had walked half way
to Silver Bow and back--he had wanted that woman more than he had ever
wanted anything on earth. He had forgotten his mine.

At first he had lashed himself with scorn, remembering his infatuation
for the woman he had married. He felt something of the indignant
astonishment of the small boy who imagines himself catching a second
attack of measles, before he discovers it is scarlet fever. But it
took him only a brief time to realise that the passion inspired by Ora
Blake was so much deeper and more various than the blind subservience
to Nature that had driven him to Ida (who had not the least idea of
being a tool of Nature herself) that it was far more dangerous than
the first inevitable attack of youthful madness could ever be. It
humiliated his pride to have been the mere victim of the race, the
rudimentary male swept into matrimony by the first woman who combined
superlative femaleness with virtue. Then he wondered if he could have
loved Ora at that time; he certainly felt ten years older today.

The word love brought him to his senses. It was formidable and
definite. While he had believed himself to be in the throes of a second
fever caught from a beautiful woman’s concordant magnetism, he had felt
merely disgusted at his weakness, not in the least disloyal to his
closest friend, whom he knew no woman could tempt him to betray. But he
realised with hideous abruptness that if he were thrown with Ora Blake
for any length of time she would become so necessary to him through
the comprehensive appeal, which he only half understood, that he no
more could pluck her out of him by the roots, as men disposed of the
superficial passion when it became inconvenient, than he could tear the
veins out of his hill with his hands.

He had felt the danger dimly when with her, although he had made up his
mind even then to get her out of Montana as quickly as possible. He
vowed anew, with the first sensation of panic he had ever experienced,
that the same sky should not cover them a week hence. He knew his
influence over Mark Blake.

Then he made a deliberate attempt to banish the subject from his mind,
ordering his thoughts to their favorite haunts underground. But one
little insidious tract, so difficult to control in all brains still
young and human, showed a disposition to create startling and vivid
pictures, to dream intensely, to cast up this woman’s face, fling it
into his consciousness, with an automatic regularity that was like a
diabolical challenge to his haughty will.

He endeavoured to think of Ora with contempt: she had married a good
fellow, but one whom she must have been compelled by the circumstances
of her life to regard as her social inferior, and who assuredly was
in no sense suited to her--merely from a parasitic dread of poverty.
Other women went to work, even if delicately nurtured. But he was
too masculine and too little influenced by certain phases of modern
thought to condemn any woman long for turning to man in her extremity.
Privately he detested women that “did things”; better for them all to
give some man the right to protect them: marriage with a good fellow
like Mark Blake, even without love, spoilt them far less than mixing
up with the world in a scramble for bread. It would have spoilt Ora,
who was now merely undeveloped; hardened, sharpened, coarsened her.
He dismissed his abortive attempt to despise her; also a dangerous
tendency to pity her.

Before he finished his tramp he had recaptured his poise. What a woman
like Ora Blake might have to give him he dared not think of, nor would
he be betrayed again into speculation. Doubtless it was all rubbish
anyway, merely another trick of the insatiable mating instinct. If
it were more--the primal instinct plus the almost equally insistent
demands of the civilised inheritances in the brain--so much the worse,
the more reason to “cut it out.” But when he returned to the cottage in
East Granite Street he threw himself on the divan in the parlour and
slept there.