XXI


The Primo vein had been recovered some time since and Ora had traversed
the fault drift twice and watched the drilling from the station; not
only to assert her rights as mistress of the mine but to experience the
sensations she had anticipated. She soon discovered that when a woman
is in love, and the issue doubtful, other interests fail to provide
sensations. But she went down into the mine every day and roamed
through the older workings. She was tormented and restless, but by no
means without hope; and this being the case she sometimes wondered
why she continued to write to Valdobia as if nothing had occurred to
interfere with their tacit engagement. It was her duty to tell him the
truth, at once, but she switched off all other currents every Saturday
morning and wrote her Roman long gay tantalising letters; being gifted
as a scribe, like so many women, she made them notable with amusing and
enlightening incidents of mining-camp life.

She had not seen Gregory since Monday evening. He had gone suddenly to
Butte on the morning following the visit of the geologists, and had
telephoned her that he should take the afternoon train to the Capital
and no doubt be detained for several days. She had expected that he
would telephone or telegraph from Helena; that he would write was too
much to expect; she had never seen his handwriting. But he had not
recognised her existence.

Four days after his departure she went down into her mine and walked as
far as the ragged opening blasted by the Apex men, thinking of Ida. How
much longer would it be before Mowbray overcame her prejudices, and her
own independent and proud spirit revolted under her husband’s complete
indifference? Few women were given such an opportunity for revenge both
subtle and open as Mowbray was offering to Ida Compton.

It was at this point in her reflections that Ora heard a light
footfall coming down the fault drift of Perch of the Devil. Without
an instant’s hesitation she descended the short ladder that had been
placed between the two drifts for the benefit of the geologists, and
relit her candle. She met Gregory in the little station. He also held
a candle, but he was so startled at the apparition that he dropped it.
She thrust the point of her candlestick into a wooden post.

“I was going over to see you,” he said unsteadily as he picked up
his candle, relighted it, and mechanically followed her example. He
turned abruptly and walked half way up the drift and back, while she
stood still, shivering with anxiety. Something had put his determined
serenity out of joint. A crisis impended. She felt her unsteadiness
and sat down suddenly on the edge of an ore car, fancying this
dimly lighted room and the black passage leading to it looked as a
death-house cell must look on the eve of execution.

Finally she stammered: “What is it? Please tell me?”

He leaned against the wall in front of her. “I am afraid it’s all
up,” he said lifelessly. “I went in on Tuesday to ask Ida to obtain a
divorce. She refused to listen. She has no wish to remarry and will
have none of divorce. Nothing could have been more definite than our
interview.”

“But--but surely in time--if we have patience----”

“There is no hope. Mowbray entered as I left. She intended to dismiss
him at once.”

Ora, without reasoning, of which she was incapable at the moment, felt
that he had been convinced by more than argument and mere words. She
flung her arms over her lap and dropping her head upon them burst into
a wild transport of tears and sobs; she was so unused to all expression
of emotion that she neither knew nor cared how to control it, and the
tears swept out the floodgates that had held her passion in check.

She looked up suddenly and saw Gregory standing over her with twitching
face and clenched hands; and exulting in the complete abandonment of
all the controls that civilisation has bred, she sprang to her feet,
flung herself into his arms and her own arms about his neck. She had
her immediate reward, for he nearly crushed her, and he kissed her
until they both were breathless and reeling.

This was the passion she had read and dreamed of; for once the
realities were commensurate; instinct warned her to postpone argument
and prolong the moment to its utmost. There was room in her brain
for the doubt if such a moment ever could come again, so little of
love-making is wholly unpremeditated. So she clung to him and kissed
him, and in that dim cavern his dark face, so reminiscent of those
great prehistoric races that interested him, looked as he felt,
primeval man that had found his mate.

But, whatever his ancient inheritance, he was the immediate product
of a highly practical civilisation. His keen calculating brain sent a
lightning flash across his passion. He lifted her off her feet and sat
her down on the ore car. Then he took a candlestick in either hand.

“Come to the other station,” he said peremptorily, and led the way to a
less dangerous seclusion.

He was half way up the fault drift before Ora, subdued but rebellious,
stooped mechanically and found the veil that she wore in place of a
hat when in the mines. She followed him slowly. She felt rather than
reasoned that she had missed her opportunity and wished angrily that
she had had lovers and knew better how to manage men. By the time she
reached the shaft station the confusion in her mind had lifted somewhat
and she had arrived at the conclusion that she could not overcome him
in the same way again, but must use her brains. She sat down on the box
and smoothed her hair with apparent unconcern.

Gregory had disposed of the two candlesticks and said, his voice
still unsteady: “There isn’t much to say, but I want to have my last
interview with you in my mine. I cannot get away from here for two or
three days. Will you leave at once?”

“Will you listen to me? I have my right to be heard?”

“What is there to say?”

She clasped her hands in her lap and looked up at him. Gregory
sighed and set his teeth. She looked surpassingly lovely and rather
helpless--women, at their best, always seemed to him pathetic.

“Gregory,” she said, “you don’t doubt that I love you?”

“No. But what is the use? Do you suppose I am going to make you my
mistress--all Montana would know it in less than no time. I’m no
saint, but it wouldn’t work--not for us!”

“But you want me?”

“Oh!” He turned away, then swung round upon her. She had stood up. Her
head was bent forward. “You should help me out!” he cried angrily.
“Can’t you see--it’s you I’m thinking of. Do you suppose I want all
the sporting women in Butte making horrible jokes about you--all your
friends cutting you? What’s a man good for if he doesn’t protect a
woman?”

“Love affairs have lasted for years without being found out.”

“Precious seldom. And we are not buried in a big city. I must live
out here and you would either have to live out here too, or I should
be sneaking into your house in Butte. A business-like intrigue!
Remember I lived somewhat before I married. Sentiment and romance soon
evaporate----”

“Oh, yes, that is always what I have thought when I have read the
American novelists’ attempts to portray what they call a ‘guilty love’.
The only word that expresses it delicately is _liaison_, and the
setting should be foreign as well. There is no background here. We are
still under the drab shadow of Puritanism. I have heard it estimated
that twenty-five thousand American women go abroad every year to
indulge in a fleeting _liaison_ that gives them courage to endure the
desperately material and commonplace life of this country for another
year. You don’t understand that because you never have been in Europe.
But Egypt--Italy--in Southern Europe anywhere--with its unbridled
beauties of nature and its far more poetic beauties that centuries of
art have given it--and a thousand years of love behind us--Oh, cannot
you imagine how wonderful love would be? Do you think _I_ should ever
want to come back?”

Gregory was staring at her. “Do you mean,” he stammered, “that you
would sacrifice your reputation openly--your future--do you care enough
for that?”

“I mean I love you so exclusively that I wish I had a thousand times
more to sacrifice.”

“But--but--there are always Americans travelling--and you know many
Europeans----”

“They are always easy to avoid. There are villas with walls, and pink
flowers on top of the walls. And we could travel and see the wonders of
art when the tourist season was over. Nor would I monopolise you. You
could have the society of men of brains and achievement everywhere.”

He continued to stare at her radiant wistful face. He had known that
she loved him, but it had never occurred to him that she would be
willing to give up the world for his sake. She was a proud woman, an
aristocrat, she had an exceptional position everywhere; the great world
when they parted stood ready to offer its consolations.

She had unrolled a heavenly vision! His mind had revolted from debasing
her to the status of what is euphemistically known in the West as
“sporting women”; he also remembered the immediate disillusionments
of his younger manhood and wondered if the hideousness of Butte had
been responsible. The Mediterranean with its ancient civilisations
flourishing and forgotten before the historic period, Egypt, full-grown
offspring of a still more ancient but vanished civilisation--both
called to that archæological instinct so closely allied to the
geological, made him fancy he heard faint ancestral voices. Ora’s
eyes were holding his, and her gaze was as powerful as his own. For
the moment he no longer was a son of the newest section of the newest
world. The turquoise waters of the Mediterranean spread before him, but
he saw it alive with galleys----

He jerked his eyes away, folded his arms and stared downward. He must
think rationally, not with vapours in his brain. It might be that he
would be more than fool to sacrifice to any consideration the one
chance for happiness in perfect union that life would offer him.

Suddenly he became aware that he was staring at the rocky floor of his
mine, of its first level; the flickering candle flames revealed bits
of bright yellow metal. And below was the second level with its superb
shoot of copper ore ten feet wide. And below, on the third level, still
was the vein far more beautiful than virgin gold. And down--down--in
those vast unlocked caverns--what mysteries--what wonder-ores might not
the earth harbour for him alone to find and name----

“What are you thinking of?” cried Ora sharply. Then she threw out her
arms wildly. “I know! I know! It is those accursed ores! Oh, God! What
have I in me, I, a mere woman, to compensate for the loss of a mine? I
was a fool--Of course! Of course!”

But Gregory, although his blood had frozen in his veins at the horrid
vision of a permanent divorce from his mine, would make no such
admission.

“Ora,” he said quietly, “it would be very wonderful--for about three
months. You would despise me if I were content to dawdle away my life
in an olive grove, or throw away my best years and these great energies
nature has given me, doing nothing in that old civilisation in which
I could find no place. And in time you would resent the weakness that
had stranded you with no recourse in life but myself. That sort of
thing has never been a success and never will be, because nature did
not make man to live on love alone, and it is much the same with the
intellectual woman. It wouldn’t work. Not with us. I have known from
the beginning that it must be marriage or nothing. And Ida would not
divorce me if I ran away with you. She would be entitled to her revenge
and she would take it.” He leaned forward and signalled the station
call. “Please take the skip when it comes. I am going below.” And he
ran down the ladder.