CHAPTER XXV--HOME AS FOUND


To clear up all the mysteries about their adventures--about Tom's
wonderful flight in the airplane, his capture by the Zeppelin's
commander, his wrecking of the Hun machine, his providential escape from
the sea; as well, the trials and dangers through which Ruth had
passed--to clear up all these things certainly took much time. It was not
until the excitement was over that they really could talk it all out.

For at first came happenings almost as exciting as those that had
already taken place. The _Seattle_ had more to do than merely to take
the Germans aboard as prisoners and Ruth and her friends as honored
passengers, while they put a prize crew on the _Admiral Pekhard_.

For the German plot had been so far-reaching, and it had come so near
being carried through to a successful finish, that the commander of the
_Seattle_, of the fast cruiser type, bound home for orders, felt an
attempt must be made to punish the Germans connected with the plot.

That U-boat 714 must be caught. They made the assistant wireless
operator, Krueger, admit that within the hour he had caught a message
from the U-boat and had sent one in reply. The submarine would arrive
about nightfall, Krueger said.

The commander of the American cruiser made his plans quickly. He sent a
large crew aboard the _Admiral Pekhard_. Then the cruiser steamed away
to a distance. But she was a very fast ship and she did not remain far
out of sight of the British steamship.

Mr. Rollife had insisted on remaining at his post. The chatter of the
_Admiral Pekhard's_ radio kept the American commander in touch with all
that went on. When the submarine appeared on the surface, not many
hundred yards away from the ship that was supposed to be in the hands of
German plotters, the _Seattle_ started for the spot at top-speed.

It was a great race! Tom was as excited as any sailor aboard, and until
it was all over he was not content to remain with Ruth below decks.

Four of the cruiser's prize crew, masquerading as Germans, manned the
motor boat and shot over to the gray side of the huge submarine. They
could all speak German. They fooled the U-boat commander, _Herr
Kapitan-Leutnant_ Scheiner, nicely. He sent his first in command and the
special crew brought from the submarine base at Kiel to the passenger
ship, crowding the small launch to the very guards.

When these men went, one by one, up the ladder, they were met behind the
shelter of the rail by a number of determined American blue jackets, who
disarmed them and knocked them down promptly if they ventured to offer
resistance.

Before the smoke of the _Seattle_ was sighted the two deck guns of the
_Admiral Pekhard_, their breechlocks replaced, were trained upon the
open hatch of the U-714. Through a trumpet the officer in command of the
crew from the _Seattle_ ordered _Kapitan-Leutnant_ Scheiner to surrender
his boat and crew.

When he made a dive for the open hatch, the forward gun of the British
ship, manned by American gunners, put a shell right down that
hatchway--and Scheiner was instantly killed.

The _Admiral Pekhard_ was sent to Plymouth, as that port was nearer than
Brest. Besides, the _Seattle's_ commander had learned already by radio
that the entire ship's company of the British ship had safely reached
that port.

Mr. Dowd and Rollife went with the _Admiral Pekhard_; but after due
consideration, and listening to the pleadings of Ruth Fielding and Tom
Cameron, the latter pair were allowed to remain aboard the American
cruiser.

"You are due to reach New York anyway, Miss Fielding," said the
commander. "And from what he tells me of his experience, I believe
Captain Cameron has earned a furlough. Although I presume he will first
have to be reported as being absent without leave."

                   *       *       *       *       *

All this is in the past, now. It seemed to Ruth Fielding, standing on
the porch of the old farmhouse attached to the Red Mill and looking down
the rutted highway, that many, many of her experiences during the months
of war must have been dreams.

Even the injured shoulder troubled her no more. She was her old
vigorous, cheerful self again. Yet there was a difference. There was a
poise of mind and a seriousness about the girl of the Red Mill that
would never again wear off. No soul that has been seared in any way by
the awful flame of the Great War will ever recover from it. The scar
must remain till death.

The war was well nigh over. Tom's prophecy was to be fulfilled. The Hun,
driven to madness by his own sins, could fight no more. The actual
fighting might end any day. On a ship coming homeward were Helen and
Jennie--the latter with a tall and handsome French colonel at her side,
who had been given special leave of absence from the French Intelligence
Department.

Ruth saw an automobile swing into the road a couple of miles away and
grow larger and larger very rapidly as it rushed down toward her. She
wound a chiffon veil about her head as she called back into the open
doorway of the farmhouse kitchen:

"Tom is coming, Aunty. I sha'n't be long away."

"All right, my pretty! All right!" returned the voice of Aunt Alvirah,
quite strong and cheerful again. "Oh, my back! and oh, my bones! All
right!"

She hobbled to the door on her cane. Her apple-withered cheeks had a
little color after all. The little old woman began to mend the moment
she set eyes on "her pretty" again.

When the automobile pulled down at the gate for Ruth to step in beside
the begoggled Tom and the engine was shut off, they could hear the
grinding of the mill-stones. Times had improved. Uncle Jabez, as dusty
and solemn of visage as ever, but with a springier step than was his
wont, came to the door and waved a be-floured hand to them.

"All right, Ruthie?" asked Tom, smiling at her.

"Quite all right, Tom."

"Got the whole day free, have you?"

"Until supper time. We can take a nice, long jaunt."

"I wish it was going to continue forever--just for you and me, Ruth!" he
murmured longingly, as he slipped in the clutch and the engine began to
purr. "A life trip, dear!"

"Well," returned Ruth Fielding, looking at him with shining eyes, "who
knows?"