CHAPTER X--WHAT WILL HAPPEN?


Ruth Fielding was not a busybody, but the peculiar attitude of the
woman, Irma Lentz, toward America's cause in the World War and what she
had overheard on deck that morning, as well as the advice the Red Cross
officer had given her, urged the girl to take Mr. Dowd, first officer of
the _Admiral Pekhard_, fully into her confidence.

He listened with keen interest to what the girl had to say. He was sure
Ruth was not a person to be easily frightened or one to spread
ill-advised and unfounded tales. Useless suspicions were not likely to
be born in her mind. She was too sane and sensible.

The chance that there were actually spies aboard the _Admiral Pekhard_
was by no means an idle one. In those days of desperate warfare between
the democratic governments of the world and the autocratic Central
Powers, no effort was neglected by the latter to thwart the war aims of
the former.

To deliberately plan the destruction of this ship, although it was not,
strictly speaking, a war ship, was quite in line with the frightfulness
of Germany and her allies. Similar plotting, however, had usually to do
with submarine activities and mines.

That German agents were aboard the _Admiral Pekhard_ with the intention
of bringing about the wrecking of the ship was, however, scarcely within
the bounds of probability. Notably because by carrying through such a
conspiracy the plotters must of necessity put their own lives in
jeopardy.

No group of German plotters had thus far shown themselves to be so
utterly unregardful of their own safety.

Ruth believed Irma Lentz to be quite bitter against the United States
and its war aims; but she could not imagine the self-styled "artist" to
be on the point of risking her personal safety on behalf of America's
enemies.

These same beliefs influenced Mr. Dowd's mind; and he said frankly:

"It may be well for us to take up the matter with Captain Hastings.
However, I cannot really believe that German spies would try to sink the
ship, and so endanger their own safety."

"It does not seem reasonable," Ruth admitted. "Nor do I mean to say I
believe anything like that is on foot. I do think, however, that the
woman and that seaman, or stoker, or whatever and whoever he is, should
be watched. They may purpose to do some damage to the _Admiral Pekhard_
after she docks at New York."

"True. And you say there is a third person--a man named Boldig? His name
is not on the passenger list."

"That is so," admitted Ruth, who had read the purser's list.

"I'll scrutinize the crew list as well," said Mr. Dowd, thoughtfully.
"Of course, he may not use that name. I remember nothing like it. Well,
we shall see. Thank you, Miss Fielding. I know Captain Hastings will
wish to thank you in person, as well."

Ruth did not expect to be immediately called to the captain's chartroom
or office. Nor was her mind entirely filled with thoughts regarding
German spies.

She had, indeed, one topic of thought that harrowed her mind
continually. It was that which kept her awake on this first night at
sea, as much as did the dull ache in her injured shoulder.

Had she expressed the desire for her companionship, Ruth knew that Helen
Cameron would have broken all her engagements in France and sailed on
the _Admiral Pekhard_. Her chum was torn, Ruth knew, between a desire to
go home with the girl of the Red Mill and to stay near Tom. As long as
Tom Cameron was in active service Helen would be anxious.

And did Helen know now what Ruth feared was the truth--that Tom had got
into serious trouble with the flying ace, Ralph Stillinger--she would be
utterly despairing on her brother's account.

Ruth read over and over again her letter from the ambulance driver,
Charlie Bragg, in which the latter had spoken of the tragic happening on
the battle front--the accident to Ralph Stillinger and his passenger. Of
course Ruth had no means of proving to herself that the passenger was
Tom Cameron, but she knew Tom had been intending to take a flight with
the American ace and that the active flying men were not in the habit of
taking up passengers daily.

The American captain who had been lost with Ralph Stillinger was more
than likely Tom Cameron. Ruth's anxiety might have thrown her into a
fever had it not been for this new line of trouble connected with the
artist, Irma Lentz. Or, was she an artist?

The news that had reached Ruth just as she boarded the _Admiral Pekhard_
had been most disquieting. Had her passage not been already arranged for
and her physical health not been what it was, the girl surely would have
gone ashore again and postponed her voyage home.

This would have necessitated Tom's sister learning the news in Charlie
Bragg's letter. But better that, Ruth thought now, than that her own
mind should be so troubled about Tom Cameron's fate.

All manner of possibilities trooped through her brain regarding what had
happened, or might have happened, to Tom. He might not, of course, have
been the passenger-captain of whom Charlie Bragg wrote. But this faint
doubt did not serve to cheer Ruth at all.

It was more than likely that Tom had shared Ralph Stillinger's
fate--whatever that fate was. The American ace's airplane had been seen
in battle with a Zeppelin. It had been seen to fall. Afterward the wreck
of the airplane was found, but neither of the men--either dead or
alive--was discovered.

That was the mystery--the unknown fate of the flying man and his
passenger. The amazing fact of their disappearance caused Ruth Fielding
anxiety and depression of mind.

She even thought of trying to get news by wireless of the tragic
happening to the flying man and his companion. But when she made inquiry
she learned that because of war measures no private message could be
sent or received by radio. Such wireless news as the naval authorities
considered well to distribute to the passengers of the _Admiral Pekhard_
was bulletined by the radio room door.

Later Ruth was sent for to attend the captain in his office. She found
the commander of the ship to be a tight, little, side-whiskered
Englishman with a large opinion of his own importance and an insular
suspicion of Americans in general. This type of British subject was
growing happily less--especially since the United States entered the war;
but Captain Hastings was not so favorably impressed by Ruth Fielding and
her story as his first officer had been.

"You know, Miss Fielding, I don't wish to have any hard feelings among
my passengers," he said. He verged toward a slight cockney accent now
and then, and he squinted rather unpleasantly.

"This is a serious accusation you bring against Miss Irma Lentz. I have
seen her passport and other papers. She is quite beyond suspicion, don't
you know. I should not wish to insult her by accusing her of being an
enemy agent. Really, Miss Fielding," he concluded bluntly, "she seems to
be much better known by people aboard than yourself."

Ruth stiffened at the implied doubt cast upon her character. Here was a
man who lacked all the tact a ship's captain is supposed to possess. He
was nothing at all like Mr. Dowd.

"I have not asked to have my status aboard your ship tested, nor my
reputation established, Captain Hastings," she said quietly but firmly.
"Had I not thought it my duty to say what I did to Mr. Dowd, I assure
you I should not have put myself out to do so. But as you have--either
justly or unjustly--judged the character of my information, you cannot by
any possibility wish to know my opinion in this. There was scarcely need
of calling me here, was there?"

She arose and turned toward the door of the chartroom, and her manner as
well as her words showed him plainly that she was offended.

"Hoighty-toighty!" exclaimed the little man, growing very red in the
face. "You take much for granted, Miss Fielding."

"I make no mistake, I believe, in understanding that you do not consider
my information to Mr. Dowd of importance."

"Oh, Dowd is a young fool!" snapped the commander of the _Admiral
Pekhard_. "He is trying to stir up a mare's nest."

"Your opinion of me must be even worse than that you have expressed of
your first officer," tartly rejoined the girl. "If you will excuse me,
Captain Hastings, I will withdraw. Really our opinions I feel sure would
never coincide."

"Wait!" exclaimed the captain. "I am willing to put one thing to the
test."

"You need do nothing to placate me, Captain Hastings," declared Ruth. "I
am quite, quite satisfied to drop the whole affair, I assure you."

"It has gone too far, as it is, Miss Fielding," declared Captain
Hastings. "Dowd will not be satisfied if you do not have the opportunity
of identifying the stoker you say you saw talking with Miss Lentz. And
that, in itself, is no crime."

"Then why trouble yourself--and me--about the matter any further?" asked
Ruth, with a shrug, and her hand still on the knob of the door.

"Confound it, you know!" burst forth the captain, "it has to go on my
report--on the log, you know. That fool, Dowd, insists. I want you to see
the stokers together, Miss Fielding, as the watches are being changed at
eight bells. If you can pick out the man you say you saw on the after
deck, I will examine him. Though it's all bally foolishness, you know,"
added the captain in a tone that did not fail to reach Ruth Fielding's
ear and increased her feeling of disgust for the pompous little man, as
well as her vexation with the whole situation.

She wished very much just then that she had not spoken at all to the
_Admiral Pekhard's_ first officer.