XIII.

Where's Solomon?--An anxious Search.--The Beach.--The cavernous
Cliffs.--Up the Precipice.--Along the Shore.--Back for Boats.


The loss of Solomon had filled the boys with anxiety, and even Captain
Corbet shared in the common feeling.  He had preferred to set out, as
he said, with a coil of rope; but the sight of this seemed to make
Solomon's fate appear darker, and looked as though he might have fallen
over a precipice, or into a deep pool of water.  They all knew that a
serious accident was not at all improbable.  They had seen the lofty
and rugged cliffs that lined the bay shore, and knew that the rising
waters, as they dashed over them, might form the grave of a man far
younger and more active than the aged Solomon.  He was weak and
rheumatic; he was also timid and easily confused.  If the water had
overtaken him anywhere, he might easily fall a prey.  In his efforts to
escape, he would soon become so terrified that his limbs would be
paralyzed.  He might then stumble over the rocks, and break some of his
bones, or he might be intrapped in some recess of the cliffs, from
which escape might be impossible without external help.

Full of thoughts like these, the boys went on, with Captain Corbet, up
through the village, looking carefully around as they went on, and
making inquiries of every one whom they met.  No one, however, could
give them any information.  At last they reached the end of the
village.  Here, on the left, there arose a high hill.  The road wound
round this, and descended into a valley, through which a stream ran to
the bay.  In this valley there was a ship-yard, where the half-finished
fabric of a large ship stood before them, and from which the rattle of
a hundred axes rose into the air.  The valley itself was a beautiful
place, running up among steep hills, till it was lost to view among a
mass of evergreen trees and rich foliage.  Below the shipyard was a
cove of no very great depth, but of extreme beauty.  Beyond this was a
broad beach, which, at the farthest end, was bounded by the projecting
headland before alluded to.  The headland was a precipitous cliff of
red sandstone, crowned at the summit with a fringe of forest trees,
white at its base were two or three hollow caverns, worn into the solid
rock by the action of the surf.  One of these was about thirty feet in
height at its mouth, and ran back for sixty or seventy feet, narrowing
all the way, like a funnel, from its entrance to its farthest extremity.

The tide was now nearly at its height, and progress down the beach and
along the cliff was impossible.  The caves were cut off also, and the
water penetrated them for some distance.  At low tide one could easily
walk down to the extreme point of the headland, and rounding this, he
would find it possible to go along in front of the cliffs for an
immense distance, either by walking along the rough beach at their
foot, or, if the water should rise again, by going along rocky shelves,
which projected for miles from the surface of the cliff.

Reaching the head of the beach, Captain Corbet paused, and looked
around.

"Before goin any further," said he, "we'd better ask the folks at this
ship-yard.  It ain't possible to tell whether he's gone by the beach or
not.  He may have gone up the valley."

"O," said Bart, dolefully, "he must have gone by the beach."

"I rayther think I'll ask, at any rate," said the captain.

So saying, he walked up towards a house that was not far off, and
accosted some men who were standing there.  On hearing his question,
they were silent for a few moments; and at last one of them recollected
seeing an aged colored man passing by early in the morning.  He had a
basket on his arm, and in every way corresponded to the description of
Solomon.  He was on his way up the shore.

"Did he go down to the pint," asked Captain Corbet, "or up to the top
of the cliff?"

The man couldn't say for certain; but as far as he could recollect, it
seemed to him that he went down to the pint.

"About what time?"

"Between eight and nine o'clock--in fact, about eight--not much later."

"Did he speak to any one here?"

"No; he walked past without stoppin.  An do you say he ain't got back?"

"Not yet."

"Wal," said the man, "for an old feller, an a feller what don't know
the country hereabouts, he's gone on a dangerous journey; an ef he's
tried to get back, he's found it a pooty hard road to travel."

"Isn't there any chance of his gettin back by the cliff?"

"Not with the water risin onto his path."

"Is there any way of gettin up to the top of the cliff?"

"Wal, fur a active young feller it wouldn't be hard, but for a pore old
critter like that thar, it couldn't be done--no how."

"Wal, boys," said Captain Corbet, sorrowfully, "I guess we'd better get
on, an not lose any more time."

They walked away in silence for some time, until at last they reached
the foot of the cliff.  A path here ran up in a winding direction so as
to reach the top.

"It seems too bad," said Captain Corbet, "not to be able to get to the
beach.  I wish I'd come in the boat.  What a fool I was not to think of
it!"

"O, I dare say the top of the cliff will do," said Bruce.

"Wal, it'll have to do.  At any rate I've got the kile of rope."

"We shall be able to see him from the top just as well, and perhaps
better."

"Wal, I hope so; but we'll be a leetle too far above him for my
fancy,--ony we can use the rope, I s'pose.  Can any of you youngsters
climb?"

"O, yes," said Bart, "all of us."

"What kind of heads have you got--stiddy?"

"Yes, good enough," said Bruce.  "I'll engage to go anywhere that I can
find a foothold; and here's Bart, that'll go certainly as far, and
perhaps farther.  And here's Phil, that can do his share.  As for Pat,
he can beat us all; he can travel like a fly, upside down, or in any
direction."

"Wal, I'm glad to hear that, boys, for it's likely you'll be wanted to
do some climbin afore we get back.  I used to do somethin in that way;
but since I've growed old, an rheumatic, I've got kine o' out o' the
way of it, an don't scacely feel sech confidence in myself as I used to
onst.  But come, we mustn't be waitin here all day."

At this they started up the path, and soon reached the top of the cliff.

Arriving here, they found themselves in a cultivated meadow, passing
through which they reached a pasture field.  After a walk of about a
quarter of a mile, they came to the cliff that ran along the shore of
the bay, and on reaching this, the whole bay burst upon their view.

It was still a beautiful day; the sun was shining brilliantly, and his
rays were reflected in a path of dazzling lustre from the face of the
sea.  The wind was fresh, and the little waves tossed up their heads
across where the sunlight fell, flashing back the rays of the sun in
perpetually changing light, and presenting to the eye the appearance of
innumerable dazzling stars.  Far away rose the Nova Scotia shore as
they had seen it in the morning, while up the bay, in the distance,
abrupt, dark, and precipitous, arose the solitary Ile Haute.

Beneath them the waters of the bay foamed and splashed; and though
there was not much surf, yet the waters came rolling among the rocks,
seething and boiling, and extending as far as the eye could reach, up
and down, in a long line of foam.

Reaching the edge, they all looked down.  At the bottom there were
visible the heads of black rocks, which arose above the waves at times,
but which, however, at intervals, were covered with the rolling waters
that tossed around them in foam and spray.  Nearer and higher up there
were rocks which projected like shelves from the face of the cliff, and
seemed capable of affording a foothold to any climber; but their
projection served also to conceal from view what lay immediately
beneath.

Along the whole beach, however, up and down, there appeared no sign of
human life.  Anxiously they looked, hoping to see some human form, in
some part of that long line of rock; but none was visible, and they
looked at one another in silence.

"Wal, he don't turn up yet; that's clar," said Captain Corbet.

"We can see a great deal from here, too," said Bart, in a despondent
tone.

"Ay, an that's jest what makes the wust of it.  I thought that one look
from a commandin pint would reveal the wanderer to our eyes."

"Perhaps he is crouching in among the rocks down there."

"Wal, I rayther think he'd manage to git up a leetle further out of the
reach of the surf than all that."

"He may be farther on."

"True; an I dare say he is, too."

"There don't seem to be any place below these rocks, where he would be
likely to be."

"No; I think that jest here he could climb up, as fur as that thar
shelf, certain.  He may be old an rheumatic, but he's able enough to
climb that fur."

"I don't think anything could have happened to him here, or we should
see some signs of him."

"Course we would--we'd see his remains--we'd see his basket, or his
hat, floatin and driftin about.  But thar's not a basket or a hat
anywhar to be seen."

"The cliff is long here, and runs in so from that point, that if he
went up any distance, it would be easy for him to be caught by the
rising tide."

"Course it would.  O, yes, course.  That's the very thing that struck
me.  It's very dangerous for an ole inexperienced man.  But come, we
mustn't stand talkin, we must hurry on, or we may as well go back agin,
at onst."

Starting forward, they walked on for some time in silence.  For about a
hundred yards they were able to keep close to the edge of the cliff, so
as to look over; but after that they encountered a dense alder thicket.
In order to traverse this, they had to go farther inland, where there
was some sort of an opening.  There they came to a wood where the
underbrush was thick, and the walking difficult.  This they traversed,
and at length worked their way once more to the edge of the cliff.
Looking down here, they found the scene very much like what it had been
farther back.  The waves were dashing beneath them among rocks whose
black crests were at times visible among the foam, while from the
cliffs there were the same projecting shelves which they had noticed
before.

"See there!" cried Bart, pointing to a place behind them.  "Do you see
how the cliff seems to go in there--just where the alder bushes grow?
That looks like a place where a man might be caught.  I wonder if he
isn't there."

"Can't we go and see?"

"I don't think you can git thar."

"O, it isn't far," said Bart.  "I'll run back and look down.  The rest
of you had better go on; I'll join you soon."

"I'll go with you," said Bruce.

"Very well."

Bruce and Bart then set out, and forced their way through the dense
alder bushes, until at length they found themselves near the place.
Here there was a chasm in the line of cliff, reaching from the top to
the bottom.  The sides were precipitous, and they could see perfectly
well all the way down.  At the bottom the water was rolling and
tossing; and this, together with the precipitous cliffs, showed them
plainly that no one could have found shelter here.

Sadly and silently they returned, and rejoined the others, who had been
walking along in advance.

"Wal?" said Captain Corbet, interrogatively.

Bart shook his head.

They then walked on for some time in silence.  "Come," said Captain
Corbet; "we've been makin one mistake ever sence we started."

"What's that?"

"We've kep altogether too still.  How do we know but we've passed him
somewhar along down thar.  We can't see behind all them corners."

"Let's shout now--the rest of the way."

"Yes; that's it; yell like all possessed."

The cries of the boys now burst forth in shrill screams and yells,
which were echoed among the woods and rocks around.

"Now," cried Captain Corbet, "all together!"

The boys shouted all together.

"That'll fetch him," said the captain, "ef anythin doos.  It's a pity
we didn't think of this afore.  What an ole fool I must ha ben to
forgit that!"

The boys now walked on shouting, and screaming, and yelling
incessantly, and waiting, from time to time, to listen for an answer.

But no answer came.

At times Captain Corbet's voice sounded forth.  His cry was a very
peculiar one.  It was high pitched, shrill, and penetrating, and seemed
as though it ought to be heard for miles.  But the united voices of the
boys, and the far-piercing yell of the captain, all sounded equally in
vain.  No response came, and at last, after standing still and
listening for a longer time than usual, they all looked despondingly at
one another, as though each were waiting for the other to suggest some
new plan of action.

Captain Corbet stood and looked musingly out upon the sea, as though
the sight of the rolling waters assisted his meditations. It was some
time before he spoke.

"I tell you what it is, boys," said he at last.  "We've ben makin
another mistake."

"How so?"

"We've gone to work wrong."

"Well, what can we do now?"

"Wal, fust an foremost, I muve we go back on our tracks."

"Go back?"

"Yas."

"Why?"

"Wal, you see, one thing,--Solomon can't hev come further than this by
no possibility, onless he started straight off to walk all the way up
the bay agin, back to Petticoat Jack by the shore route,--an as that's
too rough a route for an ole man, why, I calc'late it's not to be
thought of.  Ef, on the contrairy, he only kem out to hunt for fish,
'tain't likely he come as fur as this, an in my pinion he didn't come
nigh as fur.  You see we're a good piece on, and Solomon wouldn't hev
come so fur if he'd cal'lated to get back to the schewner.  What d'ye
say to that?"

"I've thought of that already," said Bruce, sadly.  "We've certainly
gone as far as he could possibly have gone."

"Terrew," said Captain Corbet, solemnly.

"But what can we do now?" asked Bart.

"Fust of all, go back."

"What! give him up?"

"I didn't say that.  I said to go back, an keep a good lookout along
the shore."

"But we've done that already."

"Yes, I know; but then we didn't begin to yell till quite lately,
whereas we'd ought to hev yelled from the time of fust startin. Now, I
think ef we went back yellin all the way, we'd have a chance of turnin
him up somewhar back thar whar we fust came in sight of the cliff.
Very likely, if he ain't already drownded, he's a twisted himself up in
some holler in the cliff back thar.  He couldn't hev got this fur,
certain,--unless he'd ben a runnin away."

All this seemed so certain to the boys that they had nothing to say in
opposition to it.  In fact, as Bruce said, they had already gone as far
as Solomon could possibly have gone, and this thought had occurred to
them all.  Captain Corbet's proposition, therefore, seemed to them the
only course to follow.  So they all turned and went back again.

"What I was a goin to say," remarked Captain Corbet, after walking a
few paces,--"what I was a goin to say was this.  The mistake I made was
in not gettin a boat."

"A boat?  Why we've traced the coast from the cliff well
enough--haven't we?"

"No, not well enough.  We'd ought to have planned this here expedition
more kerfully.  It wan't enough to go along the top of the cliff this
here way.  You see, we've not been able to take in the lower part of
the cliff underneath.  We'd ought to hev got a boat.  Some of us could
hev gone along the cliff, jest as we hev ben doin, and the others could
have pulled along the shore an kep up a sharp lookout that way.  We've
lost any quantity o' time that way, but that's no reason why we should
lose any more; so I muve that some of us go back, right straight off,
an get a boat at the ship-yard, an come back.  I'll go, unless some o'
youns think yourselfes smarter, which ain't onlikely."

"O, you can't run, captain," said Bart.  "Bruce and I will go, and
we'll run all the way."

"Wal, that's the very best thing that you could do.  You're both young,
an actyve.  As for me, my days of youth an actyvity air over, an I'm in
the sere an yaller leaf, with spells o' rheumatics. So you start off as
quick as your legs can carry you, an ef you run all the way, so much
the better."

The boys started off at this, and going on the full run, they hurried,
as fast as possible, back over the path they had traversed, and through
the woods, and over the fields, and down the cliff towards the
ship-yard.

Phil and Pat, however, remained with Captain Corbet; and these three
walked back along the edge of the cliff; still looking down carefully
for signs of Solomon, and keeping up constantly their loud, shrill
cries.

Thus they walked back, till, at length, they reached the place where
the alders were growing.  Here they were compelled to make a detour as
before, after which they returned to the cliff, and walked along,
shouting and yelling as when they came.