XI.

Afloat again.--The rushing Water.--Down to the Bottom.--Desperate
Circumstances.--Can they be remedied?--New Hopes and Plans.


The boat was at last afloat before Tom's eyes.

At first he had thought of holding it by the painter, and patiently
standing on the beach, but the sight of it now changed his purposes.
He thought that it would be a far more sensible plan to get on board,
and keep the boat near the beach in that way.  His bit of stick, which
he had found among the drift-wood, could be used as an oar, and was
good enough to enable him to move the boat as much as would be
necessary.  As he would have to wait for six hours at least, it was a
matter of great importance that he should be as little fatigued as
possible, especially as he had to look forward to a voyage, after the
tide had fallen, attended with the possibility of increased labor and
exertion.  All these thoughts came rapidly to his mind, but passed in
much less time than it takes to tell it, so that Tom had scarcely seen
the boat afloat than he rushed through the water, and clambered into
it.  Then, taking his stick, he stood up and looked around.

The scene around has already been described.  Tom kept his stick in the
water, so as to have it ready for use.  He purposed keeping the boat at
a convenient distance from the shore by pushing and paddling.  By
keeping it within a distance of from three to six yards, he thought he
would, for the present at least, be able to keep afloat, and yet avoid
the sweep of the tides.  He did not expect to remain in this particular
spot all the time, but expected to find some place which would be out
of the way of the tide, where he could float comfortably without being
forced to keep in too close to the land.

But suddenly Tom's thoughts and speculations were rudely interrupted.

It appeared to him that there was a very unusual feeling about the
boat.  She did not seem as high out of the water as she ought to have
been, and her bows seemed to be lower than they had been. There was
also a slight vibration in her, which he had never noticed before, and
which struck him now as very peculiar.  In the midst of this there came
to his ears a low, faint, and scarcely perceptible sound, made up of
peculiar bubbling and gurgling noises, which sounded from the boat.

One brief examination showed him that the boat was certainly very much
deeper in the water than she had been.

Five seconds later her bows had sunk farther.

Two seconds more, and Tom's feet were surrounded by water up to his
ankles.

The boat was filling!

Scarce had he made this discovery than the water rose swiftly up, the
boat sank quickly down, the sea rolled over her sides, and the boat
went to the bottom.

Very fortunate was it for Tom, at that moment, that he had not pushed
out farther from the shore.  When the boat went down he was not more
than three or four yards off, and he did not sink lower than up to his
neck.  But the shock was a sudden one, and for a moment almost
paralyzed him.  The next instant, however, he recovered from it; and
looking round, he saw the box of biscuit floating within his reach.
Making a wild dash at this, he secured it, and waded ashore with it in
safety.  He then turned mournfully to look after the boat, and found
that it was visible, floating on the surface.  As he left it, it had
floated up, his weight being the only thing that had sent it below.
The tide was still coming in, so that it did not float away.  Tom flung
off his coat and waistcoat, and hurrying into the water, soon caught
and dragged it as near as he could to the beach.  Then he secured it
once more, and waited.  Standing there, he looked gloomily at the
vessel, wherein such precious hopes had been freighted only to be lost.
What had happened?  Why could not the boat float?  What was the matter
with her?  These were the wondering questions which occurred to him
without his being able to give any answer.

One thing he saw plainly, and that was, that he had lost this tide. The
next high tide would be after midnight, and the next would be between
one and two on the following day.  If he could find out what was the
matter with the boat, and fix it, he would have to wait till the next
day, unless he chose to watch for his chance after midnight, and make
the journey then.

He was not a boy who could be long inactive; so now, after a brief
period, in which he gave up to the natural despondency of his soul, he
stirred himself up once more, and sought comfort in occupation. The box
of biscuit did not seem much injured, it had not floated long enough
for the sea-water to penetrate it.  Assuring himself of this, he next
turned to the boat and took out its contents.  These were the old sail,
the coil of rope, and the baling dipper.

By this time the tide had reached its height, and after the usual time
of delay, began to fall once more.  The boat was secured to the shore,
and after a time the water began to leave her.  Tom sat at a little
distance, wondering what could be the matter with her, and deferring
his examination until the boat should be left aground.  It was a
mystery to him how this sudden change had occurred, and why the boat,
which had floated so well during his long drift, should now, all of a
sudden, begin to leak with such astonishing rapidity.  Something must
have happened--something serious, too; but what it was, or how it had
happened, he could not, for the life of him, conjecture.

As Tom sat there, the tide gradually left the boat; and as the tide
left, the water ran out, keeping at just the same level inside as the
water outside.  This showed, even to his inexperienced eyes, that the
leak must be a very large one, since it admitted of such a ready flow
of water in and out.  The water descended lower and lower as he sat,
until, at last, the boat was left by the retreating waves.  The water
had all run out.

Tom now advanced, and proceeded to examine her.  When he was arranging
her cargo before, the coil of rope had been in the bows. This had
prevented him from detecting anything wrong in the boat. But now, since
everything had been taken out, one glance only was quite sufficient to
make known to him instantly the whole difficulty.  There, in the bows,
underneath the very place where the coil of rope had lain, was a huge
aperture.  The planks had been beaten in, and one side of the bow was
destroyed beyond hope of remedy.

The sight of such an irremediable calamity as this renewed for a time
the despondency which he had felt at the first sinking of the boat.
Full of depression, he turned away, and tried to account for it all.
It was on the previous day that he had landed--about twenty-four hours
ago.  How had he passed the time since then, and what had happened?
This he tried to remember.

In the first place, up to the moment of landing the boat was perfectly
sound, and far from all injury.  It had not been hurt during the drift.
It had struck at one place, but the long voyage that had followed
showed that no damage had resulted.  Finally, it had not been harmed by
landing on Quaco Ledge.  Since that time he had drifted in safety far
across the bay, without meeting with any accident.  All this proved
clearly that the damage must have been done to the boat since his
landing on the island.

He found it very difficult to recall anything that had happened since
then.  On his first arrival he was worn out and exhausted. He
remembered vaguely how he came in sight of the giant cliff, how he
dragged the boat along, how he secured it to a tree, and then how he
flung himself down on the grass and fell asleep.  After that all was
obscure to his memory; but he could recall his waking at midnight and
listening to the roar of the wind and the dash of the surf.  Evidently
there must have been a heavier sea on the beach at that time than when
he landed, and this was sufficient to account for the accident to the
boat.  She had been beating on the rough rocks at high tide, exposed to
the full sweep of the surf, and her bows had been stove in.

The melancholy spectacle of the ruined boat made Tom see that his stay
on the island might be prolonged even beyond the following day.  No
sooner had this thought occurred to him than he went over to the
articles which he had taken out of the boat, and passed them all in
review before him, as though he were anxious to know the full extent of
his resources.  He spread out the wet sail in the sun.  He spread out
his coat and waistcoat.  In the pocket of the latter he found a card of
matches, which were a little damp.  These he seized eagerly and laid on
the top of a stone, exposed to the rays of the sun, so as to dry them.
The clothes which he kept on were wet through, of course, but he
allowed them to dry on him.

He had been working now pretty industriously all the morning, first at
searching after a piece of wood, then in cutting down the pole, then in
searching among the drift-wood, and finally at the boat. He felt, at
length, hungry; and as he could not yet decide upon what was to be done
next, he determined to satisfy his desires, and kill the time by taking
his dinner.  The repast was a frugal one, consisting as before, of
biscuit, which were washed down by cold water; but Tom did not
complain.  The presence of food of any sort was a cause for
thankfulness to one in his position, and it was with a feeling of this
sort, in spite of his general depression of spirits, that he ate his
meal.

After this he felt much more refreshed, and began to consider what he
had better do next.  Of course, the centre of interest to him was the
boat, and he could not give up that hope of escape without a struggle.
As long as there was a hope of making his way from the island by means
of that, so long might he keep up his heart; but if the damage that had
been done should prove irreparable, how would he be able to endure his
situation?  Whatever it was, it would be best to know the worst once
for all.  Perhaps he might stop the leak.  He had material around which
seemed to be the right sort of thing to stop a leak with.  He had the
piece of sail, which could be cut up into small pieces, and used to
stop the leak.  If he had possessed a hatchet and some nails, he would
have made an effort to repair the fracture in the planks of the boat;
but as he had nothing of that sort, he tried to devise some method by
which the water might be kept out.  As he thought, there gradually grew
up in his mind the rude outline of a plan which promised something, and
seemed to him to be certainly worth trying.  At any rate, he thought,
it will serve to give me an occupation; and any occupation, even if it
proves to be of no practical value, is better than sitting here doing
nothing at all.

Having something to do once more quickened Tom's energies anew, and
starting to his feet, he prepared to put his plan into execution. First
of all, in order to carry out that plan, it was necessary for him to
get a number of blocks and boards of different sizes. These, he knew,
could easily be found among the driftwood on the beach.  Over there he
hurried, and after a moderate search he succeeded, at length, in
finding bits of wood that seemed suited to the purpose which he had in
view.  With these he came back to the boat; but as there was a large
number of them, he had to make several journeys before the whole
collection was brought over.

Then he took his pole, and, putting a block under it, used it as a
lever to raise up the boat.  By dexterous management he succeeded in
doing this, and at the same time he ran a board underneath the bow of
the boat as it was slightly raised.  This manoeuvre he repeated several
times, each time raising his lever higher, by means of a higher
fulcrum, and thus constantly raising the bow of the boat; while after
each elevation the bow was secured in its new position by running an
additional board underneath it, over the other preceding boards.  By
carefully and perseveringly pursuing this course, he at length
succeeded in raising the bow of the boat about a foot in the air.  This
gave him an opportunity to examine it thoroughly outside as well as
inside, and to see the whole extent of the damage that had been done.

It has already been said that the damage was serious.  Tom's
examination now convinced him that it was in every respect as serious
as he had supposed, if not still more so.  Even if he did possess a
hatchet and nails, or a whole box full of tools, he doubted whether it
would be in his power to do anything whatever in the way of repairing
it.  No less than three of the lower planks of the bows, down to the
very keel, were beaten in and broken so badly that they seemed actually
crushed and mangled.  It must have been a fearful beating, and
pounding, and grinding on the rocks which had caused this.  The planks,
though thus broken, still held together; but it seemed to Tom that with
a blow of his fist he could easily beat it all in; and as he looked at
it he could not help wondering how it had happened that the work which
the rocks had thus so nearly effected had not been completely finished.
However, the planks did hold together yet; and now the question was,
Could any thing be done?

In answer to this question, Tom thought of the old sail and the coil of
rope.  Already he had conceived the rude outline of a plan whereby the
entrance of the water might be checked.  The plan was worth trying, and
he determined to set about it at once, and use up the hours before him
as long as he could, without any further delay. If by any possibility
he could stop that leak, he determined to start off at the next high
tide, that very night, and run the risk. It was a daring, even a
foolhardy thought; but Tom was desperate, and the only idea which he
had was, to escape as soon as possible.

He now made some measurements, after which he went to the old sail, and
cut a piece from the end of it.  This he divided into smaller pieces,
each about a yard square.  Each of these pieces he folded up in three
folds, so as to make them about a foot wide and eighteen inches long.
Others he folded into six folds, making them about half the size of the
larger pieces.  All this took up much time, for he measured and planned
very carefully, and his calculations and measurements had to be done
slowly and cautiously. Returning to the boat with these bits of folded
canvas, he put one of the larger pieces on the inside, against the bow,
right over the broken place.  Another large piece was placed carefully
over this, and then the smaller pieces were laid against these.  In
this way he adjusted all the pieces of canvas in such a way as to cover
up the whole place where the leak was.

Then he went over to the drift-wood, and spent a long time searching
after some bits of wood.  He at length found a half dozen pieces of
board, about a foot long, and from six to eight inches in width.  He
also found some bits of scantling, and palings, which were only a foot
or so in length.  All these he brought back, and laid them down on the
beach near the boat.

He now proceeded to place these bits of wood in the bows, in such a way
as to keep the canvas in a firm position.  His idea was, that the
canvas, by being pressed against the opening, might keep out the water,
and the wood, by being properly arranged, might keep the canvas secure
in its place.  The arrangement of the wood required the greatest care.
First of all, he took the smallest bits, and stood these up against the
canvas, so that they might correspond as nearly as possible with the
curve of the bows.  A few more pieces were placed in the hollow part of
this curve, and outside these the larger pieces were placed.  Between
the outside pieces and the inner ones he thrust some of the smallest
pieces which he could find.  After thus arranging all his boards, he
found that there lay between the outside board and the first seat of
the boat a space of about one foot.  Selecting a piece of wood of about
that length, he put one end against the board, and the other against
the seat, and pressed it into a position where it served to keep the
board tight in its place.  Then he took other pieces of about the same
length, and arranged them in the same way, so that, by being fixed
between the board and the seat, they might keep the whole mass of
boards and canvas pressed tight against the opening in the bows.  After
placing as many blocks in position as he conveniently could, his next
work was to secure them all.  In order to effect this, another journey
to the drift-wood was necessary, and another search.  This time he
selected carefully a number of sticks, not more than half an inch in
thickness, some of them being much thinner.  He found pieces of paling,
and laths, and shingles which suited his ideas. Returning with these to
the boat, he proceeded to thrust them, one by one, into the interstices
of the boards, using a stone to drive them into their places.

At last the work was finished as far as he could accomplish it, and
there remained nothing more to be done.  As far as he could see, by
shaking, and pulling, and pushing at the collection of sticks and
canvas, it was very firm and secure.  Every stick seemed to be tight,
and the pressure which they maintained against the aperture was so
strong that the wood-work now was forced out a little distance beyond
the outline of the boat.  He examined most carefully all about the bows
on the outside, but saw no place which did not seem to be fully
protected.  It seemed to him now as though that piled-up canvas ought
to resist the entrance of the water, or, if not, at least that it ought
not to allow it to enter so rapidly but that he could easily keep the
boat baled out.

He was not altogether confident, yet he was hopeful, and as determined
as ever to make a trial.