I.

Old Acquaintances gather around old Scenes.--Antelope, ahoy!--How are
you, Solomon?--Round-about Plan of a round about Voyage.--The Doctor
warns, rebukes, and remonstrates, but, alas! in vain.--It must be
done.--Beginning of a highly eventful Voyage.


It was a beautiful morning, in the month of July, when a crowd of boys
assembled on the wharf of Grand Pre.  The tide was high, the turbid
waters of Mud Creek flowed around, a fresh breeze blew, and if any
craft was going to sea she could not have found a better time.  The
crowd consisted chiefly of boys, though a few men were mingled with
them.  These boys were from Grand Pre School, and are all old
acquaintances.  There was the stalwart frame of Bruce, the Roman face
of Arthur, the bright eyes of Bart, the slender frame of Phil, and the
earnest glance of Tom.  There, too, was Pat's merry smile, and the
stolid look of Bogud, and the meditative solemnity of Jiggins, not to
speak of others whose names need not be mentioned.  Amid the crowd the
face of Captain Corbet was conspicuous, and the dark visage of Solomon,
while that of the mate was distinguishable in the distance.  To all
these the good schooner Antelope formed the centre of attraction, and
also of action.  It was on board of her that the chief bustle took
place, and towards her that all eyes were turned.

The good schooner Antelope had made several voyages during the past few
months, and now presented herself to the eye of the spectator not much
changed from her former self.  A fine fresh coat of coal tar had but
recently ornamented her fair exterior, while a coat of whitewash inside
the hold had done much to drive away the odor of the fragrant potato.
Rigging and sails had been repaired as well as circumstances would
permit, and in the opinion of her gallant captain she was eminently
seaworthy.

On the present occasion things bore the appearance of a voyage. Trunks
were passed on board and put below, together with coats, cloaks,
bedding, and baskets of provisions.  The deck was strewn about with the
multifarious requisites of a ship's company.  The Antelope, at that
time, seemed in part an emigrant vessel, with a dash of the yacht and
the coasting schooner.

In the midst of all this, two gentlemen worked their way through the
crowd to the edge of the wharf.

"Well, boys," said one, "well, captain, what's the meaning of all this?"

Captain Corbet started at this, and looked up from a desperate effort
to secure the end of one of the sails.

"Why, Dr. Porter!" said he; "why, doctor!--how d'ye do?--and Mr. Long,
too!--why, railly!"

The boys also stopped their work, and looked towards their teachers
with a little uneasiness.

"What's all this?" said Dr. Porter, looking around with a smile; "are
you getting up another expedition?"

"Wal, no," said Captain Corbet, "not 'xactly; fact is, we're kine o'
goin to take a vyge deoun the bay."

"Down the bay?"

"Yes.  You see the boys kine o' want to go home by water, rayther than
by land."

"By water!  Home by water!" repeated Mr. Long, doubtfully.

"Yes," said Captain Corbet; "an bein as the schewner was in good
repair, an corked, an coal-tarred, an whitewashed up fust rate, I kine
o' thought it would redound to our mootooil benefit if we went off on
sich a excursion,--bein pleasanter, cheaper, comfortabler, an every way
preferable to a land tower."

"Hem," said Dr. Porter, looking uneasily about.  "I don't altogether
like it.  Boys, what does it all mean?"

Thus appealed to, Bart became spokesman for the boys.

"Why, sir," said he, "we thought we'd like to go home by water--that's
all."

"Go home by water!" repeated the doctor once more, with a curious smile.

"Yes, sir."

"What? by the Bay of Fundy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Who are going?"

"Well, sir, there are only a few of us.  Bruce, and Arthur, and Tom,
and Phil, and Pat, besides myself."

"Bruce and Arthur?" said the doctor; "are they going home by the Bay of
Fundy?"

"Yes, sir," said Bart, with a smile.

"I don't see how they can get to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Prince
Edward's Island from the Bay of Fundy," said the doctor, "without going
round Nova Scotia, and that will be a journey of many hundred miles."

"O, no, sir," said Bruce; "we are going first to Moncton."

"O, is that the idea?"

"Yes, sir."

"And where will you go from Moncton?"

"To Shediac, and then home."

"And are you going to Newfoundland by that route, Tom?" asked the
doctor.

"Yes, sir," said Tom, gravely.

"From Shediac?"

"Yes, sir."

"I never knew before that there were vessels going from Shediac to
Newfoundland."

"O, I'm going to Prince Edward's Island first, sir, with Bruce and
Arthur," said Tom.  "I'll find my way home from there."

The doctor smiled.

"I'm afraid you'll find it a long journey before you reach home. Won't
your friends be anxious?"

"O, no, sir.  I wrote that I wanted to visit Bruce and Arthur, and they
gave me leave."

"And you, Phil, are you going home by the Antelope?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are going exactly in a straight line away from it."

"Am I, sir?"

"Of course you are.  This isn't the way to Chester."

"Well, sir, you see I'm going to visit Bart at St. John."

"O,  I understand.  And that is your plan, then?"

"Yes, sir," said Bart.  "Pat is going too."

"Where are you going first?"

"First, sir, we will sail to the Petitcodiac River, and go up it as far
as Moncton, where Bruce, and Arthur, and Tom will leave us."

"And then?"

"Then we will go to St. John, where Phil, and Pat, and I will leave
her.  Solomon, too, will leave her there."

"Solomon!" cried the doctor.  "What!  Solomon!  Is Solomon going? Why,
what can I do without Solomon?  Here!  Hallo!--Solomon!  What in the
world's the meaning of all this?"

Thus summoned, Solomon came forth from the cabin, into which he had
dived at the first appearance of the doctor.  His eyes were downcast,
his face was demure, his attitude and manner were abject.

"Solomon," said the doctor, "what's this I hear?  Are you going to St.
John?"

"Ony temp'ly, sah--jist a leetle visit, sah," said Solomon, very
humbly, stealing looks at the boys from his downcast eyes.

"But what makes you go off this way without asking, or letting me know?"

"Did I, sah?" said Solomon, rolling his eyes up as though horrified at
his own wickedness; "the sakes now!  Declar, I clean forgot it."

"What are you going away for?"

"Why, sah, for de good oh my helf.  Docta vises sea vyge; sides, I got
frens in St. John, an business dar, what muss be tended to."

"Well, well," said the doctor, "I suppose if you want to go you'll find
reasons enough; but at the same time you ought to have let me known
before."

"Darsn't, sah," said Solomon.

"Why not?"

"Fraid you'd not let me go," said Solomon, with a broad grin, that
instantly was suppressed by a demure cough.

"Nonsense," said the doctor; and then turning away, he spoke a few
words apart with Mr. Long.

"Well, boys," said the doctor, at last, "this project of yours doesn't
seem to me to be altogether safe, and I don't like to trust you in this
way without anybody as a responsible guardian."

Bart smiled.

"O, sir," said he, "you need not be at all uneasy.  All of us are
accustomed to take care of ourselves; and besides, if you wanted a
responsible guardian for us, what better one could be found than
Captain Corbet?"

The doctor and Mr. Long both shook their heads.   Evidently neither of
them attached any great importance to Captain Corbet's guardianship.

"Did you tell your father how you were going?" asked the doctor, after
a few further words with Mr. Long.

"O, yes, sir; and he told me I might go.  What's more, he promised to
charter a schooner for me to cruise about with Phil and Pat after I
arrived home."

"And we got permission, too," said Bruce.

"Indeed!" said the doctor.  "That changes the appearance of things. I
was afraid that it was a whim of your own.  And now, one thing
more,--how are you off for provisions?"

"Wal, sir," said Captain Corbet, "I've made my calculations, an I think
I've got enough.  What I might fail in, the boys and Solomon have made
up."

"How is it, Solomon?" asked the doctor.

Solomon grinned.

"You sleep in the hold, I see," continued the doctor.

"Yes, sir," said Bruce.  "It's whitewashed, and quite sweet now. We'll
only be on board two or three days at the farthest, and so it really
doesn't much matter how we go."

"Well, boys, I have no more to say; only take care of yourselves."

With these words the doctor and Mr. Long bade them good by, and then
walked away.

The other boys, however, stood on the wharf waiting to see the vessel
off.  They themselves were all going to start for home in a few
minutes, and were only waiting for the departure of the Antelope.

This could not now be long delayed.  The tide was high.  The wind fresh
and fair.  The luggage, and provisions, and stores were all on board.
Captain Corbet was at the helm.  All was ready.  At length the word was
given, the lines were cast off; and the Antelope moved slowly round,
and left the wharf amid the cheers of the boys.  Farther and farther it
moved away, then down the tortuous channel of Mud Creek, until at last
the broad expanse of Minas Basin received them.

For this voyage the preparations had been complete.  It had first been
thought of several weeks before, and then the plan and the details had
been slowly elaborated.  It was thought to be an excellent idea, and
one which was in every respect worthy of the "B. O. W. C."  Captain
Corbet embraced the proposal with enthusiasm. Letters home, requesting
permission, received favorable answers. Solomon at first resisted, but
finally, on being solemnly appealed to as Grand Panjandrum, he found
himself unable to withstand, and thus everything was gradually
prepared.  Other details were satisfactorily arranged, though not
without much serious and earnest debate.  The question of costume
received very careful attention, and it was decided to adopt and wear
the weather-beaten uniforms that had done service amidst mud and water
on a former occasion. Solomon's presence was felt to be a security
against any menacing famine; and that assurance was made doubly sure by
the presence of a cooking stove, which Captain Corbet, mindful of
former hardships, had thoughtfully procured and set up in the hold.
Finally, it was decided that the flag which had formerly flaunted the
breeze should again wave over them; and so it was, that as the Antelope
moved through Mud Creek, like a thing of life, the black flag of the
"B. O. W. C." floated on high, with its blazonry of a skull, which now,
worn by time, looked more than ever like the face of some mild,
venerable, and paternal monitor.

Some time was taken up in arranging the hold.  Considerable confusion
was manifest in that important locality.  Tin pans were intermingled
with bedding, provisions with wearing apparel, books with knives and
forks, while amid the scene the cooking stove towered aloft prominent.
To tell the truth, the scene was rather free and easy than elegant; nor
could an unprejudiced observer have called it altogether comfortable.
In fact, to one who looked at it with a philosophic mind, an air of
squalor might possibly have been detected.  Yet what of that?  The
philosophic mind just alluded to would have overlooked the squalor, and
regarded rather the health, the buoyant animal spirits, and the
determined habit of enjoyment, which all the ship's company evinced,
without exception.  The first thing which they did in the way of
preparation for the voyage was to doff the garments of civilized life,
and to don the costume of the "B. O. W. C."  Those red shirts,
decorated with a huge white cross on the back, had been washed and
mended, and completely reconstructed, so that the rents and patches
which were here and there visible on their fair exteriors, served as
mementos of former exploits, and called up associations of the past
without at all deteriorating from the striking effect of the present.
Glengary bonnets adorned their heads, and served to complete the
costume.

The labor of dressing was followed by a hurried arrangement of the
trunks and bedding; after which they all emerged from the hold and
ascending to the deck, looked around upon the scene.  Above, the sky
was blue and cloudless, and between them and the blue sky floated the
flag, from whose folds the face looked benignantly down.  The tide was
now on the ebb, and as the wind was fair, both wind and tide united to
bear them rapidly onward.  Before them was Blomidon, while all around
was the circling sweep of the shores of Minas Bay.  A better day for a
start could not have been found, and everything promised a rapid and
pleasant run.

"I must say," remarked Captain Corbet, who had for some time been
standing buried in his own meditations at the helm,--"I must say, boys,
that I don't altogether regret bein once more on the briny deep.  There
was a time," he continued, meditatively, "when I kine o' anticipated
givin up this here occypation, an stayin to hum a nourishin of the
infant.  But man proposes, an woman disposes, as the sayin is,--an you
see what I'm druv to.  It's a great thing for a man to have a companion
of sperrit, same as I have, that keeps a' drivin an a drivin at him,
and makes him be up an doin.  An now, I declar, if I ain't gittin to be
a confirmed wanderer agin, same as I was in the days of my halcyon an
shinin youth.  Besides, I have a kine o' feelin as if I'd be a
continewin this here the rest of all my born days."

"I hope you won't feel homesick," remarked Bart, sympathetically.

"Homesick," repeated the captain.  "Wal, you see thar's a good deal to
be said about it.  In my hum thar's a attraction, but thar's also a
repulsion.  The infant drors me hum, the wife of my buzzum drives me
away, an so thar it is, an I've got to knock under to the strongest
power.  An that's the identical individool thing that makes the aged
Corbet a foogitive an a vagabond on the face of the mighty deep.  Still
I have my consolations."

The captain paused for a few moments, and then resumed.

"Yes," he continued, "I have my consolations.  Surroundins like these
here air a consolation.  I like your young faces, an gay an airy ways,
boys.  I like to see you enjoy life.  So, go in.  Pitch in.  Go ahead.
Sing.  Shout.  Go on like mad.  Carry on like all possessed, an you'll
find the aged Corbet smilin amid the din, an a flutterin of his
venerable locks triumphant amid the ragin an riotin elements."

"It's a comfort to know that, at any rate," said Tom.  "We'll give you
enough of that before we leave, especially as we know it don't annoy
you."

"I don't know how it is," said the captain, solemnly, "but I begin to
feel a sort of somethin towards you youngsters that's very absorbin.
It's a kine o' anxious fondness, with a mixtoor of indulgent
tenderness.  How ever I got to contract sech a feelin beats me.  I
s'pose it's bein deprived of my babby, an exiled from home, an so my
vacant buzzom craves to be filled.  I've got a dreadful talent for doin
the pariential, an what's more, not only for doin the pariential, but
for feelin of it.  So you boys, ef ever you see me a doin of the
pariential towards youns, please remember that when I act like an
anxious an too indulgent parient towards youns, it's because I feel
like one."

For some hours they traversed the waters, carried swiftly on by the
united forces of the wind and tide.  At last they found themselves
close by Blomidon, and under his mighty shadow they sailed for some
time.  Then they doubled the cape, and there, before them, lay a long
channel--the Straits of Minas, through which the waters pour at every
ebb and flood.  Their course now lay through this to the Bay of Fundy
outside; and as it was within two hours of the low tide, the current
ran swiftly, hurrying them rapidly past the land. Here the scene was
grand and impressive in the extreme.  On one side arose a lofty,
precipitous cliff, which extended for miles, its sides scarred and
tempest-torn, its crest fringed with trees, towering overhead many
hundreds of feet, black, and menacing, and formidable.  At its base was
a steep beach, disclosed by the retreating tide, which had been formed
by the accumulated masses of rock that had fallen in past ages from the
cliffs above.  These now, from the margin of the water up to high-water
mark, were covered with a vast growth of sea-weed, which luxuriated
here, and ran parallel to the line of vegetation on the summit of the
cliff. On the other side of the strait the scene was different.  Here
the shores were more varied; in one place, rising high on steep
precipices, in others, thrusting forth black, rocky promontories into
the deep channel; in others again, retreating far back, and forming
bays, round whose sloping shores appeared places fit for human
habitation, and in whose still waters the storm-tossed bark might find
a secure haven.

As they drifted on, borne along by the impetuous tide, the shores on
either side changed, and new vistas opened before them.  At last they
reached the termination of the strait, the outer portal of this long
avenue, which here was marked by the mighty hand of Nature in
conspicuous characters.  For here was the termination of that long
extent of precipitous cliff which forms the outline of Blomidon; and
this termination, abrupt, and stern, and black, shows, in a
concentrated form, the power of wind and wave.  The cliff ends abrupt,
broken off short, and beyond this arise from the water several giant
fragments of rock, the first of which, shaped like an irregular
pyramid, rivals the cliff itself in height, and is surrounded by other
rocky fragments, all of which form a colossal group, whose aggregated
effect never fails to overawe the mind of the spectator.  Such is Cape
Split, the terminus of Cape Blomidon, on the side of the Bay of Fundy.
Over its shaggy summits now fluttered hundreds of sea-gulls; round its
black base the waves foamed and thundered, while the swift tide poured
between the interstices of the rugged rocks.

"Behind that thar rock," said Captain Corbet, pointing to Cape Split,
"is a place they call Scott's Bay.  Perhaps some of you have heard tell
of it."

"I have a faint recollection of such a place," said Bart.  "Scott's
Bay, do you call it?  Yes, that must be the place that I've heard of;
and is it behind this cape?"

"It's a bay that runs up thar," said the captain.  "We'll see it soon
arter we get further down.  It's a fishin and ship-buildin place.  They
catch a dreadful lot of shad thar sometimes."

Swiftly the Antelope passed on, hurried on by the tide, and no longer
feeling much of the wind; swiftly she passed by the cliffs, and by the
cape, and onward by the sloping shores, till at length the broad bosom
of the Bay of Fundy extended before their eyes. Here the wind ceased
altogether, the water was smooth and calm, but the tide still swept
them along, and the shores on each side receded, until at length they
were fairly in the bay.  Here, on one side, the coast of Nova Scotia
spread away, until it faded from view in the distance, while on the
other side the coast of New Brunswick extended.  Between the schooner
and this latter coast a long cape projected, while immediately in front
arose a lofty island of rock, whose summit was crowned with trees.

"What island is that?" asked Tom.

"That," said Captain Corbet, "is Isle o' Holt."

"I think I've heard it called Ile Haute," said Bart.

"All the same," said Captain Corbet, "ony I believe it was named after
the man that diskivered it fust, an his name was Holt."

"But it's a French name," said Tom; "Ile Haute means high island."

"Wal, mebbe he was a Frenchman," said Captain Corbet.  "I won't
argufy--I dare say he was.  There used to be a heap o' Frenchmen about
these parts, afore we got red of 'em."

"It's a black, gloomy, dismal, and wretched-looking place," said Tom,
after some minutes of silent survey.