X.

Tom ashore.--Storm at Night.--Up in the Morning.--The Cliffs and the
Beach.--A startling Discovery.--A desert Island.--A desperate
Effort.--Afloat again.


Tom slept soundly for a long time in the spot where he had flung
himself.  The sense of security came to the assistance of his wearied
limbs, and lulled him into profounder slumbers.  There was nothing here
that might rudely awaken him--no sudden boat shocks, no tossings and
heavings of waves, no hoarse, menacing thunders of wrathful surges from
rocky shores; nor were there distressing dreams to harass him, or any
anxieties carried from his waking hours into the land of slumbers to
annoy and to arouse.  From Monday night until this time on Thursday, he
had known but little sleep, and much fatigue and sorrow.  Now the
fatigue and the sorrow were all forgotten, and the sleep was all his
own.  Not a thought had he given to the land which he had reached so
strangely.  It was enough for him that he felt the solid ground beneath
his feet.

For hours he slept there, lying there like a log, wrapped in the old
sail, moving not a limb, but given up altogether to his refreshing
slumber.  At length he waked, and, uncovering his head, looked around.
At first he thought that he was in the boat, then he grew bewildered,
and it was only after a persistent effort of memory that he could
recollect his position.

He looked all around, but nothing was visible.  There was nothing
around him but darkness, intense and utter.  It was like the
impenetrable veil that had enshrouded him during the night of his
memorable voyage.  He could not see where his boat was.  A vague idea
which he had of examining its fastening was dismissed.  He felt hungry,
and found the biscuit box lying under one corner of the sail.  A few of
these were sufficient to gratify his hunger. Nothing more could be
done, and he saw plainly that it would be necessary for him to wait
there patiently until morning.  Once more, therefore, he rolled himself
up in the sail, and tried to go to sleep.  But at first his efforts
were vain.  The first fatigue had passed away, and now that he had been
refreshed by sleep, his mind was too much occupied by thoughts of his
past voyage to be readily lulled to sleep again.  He could not help
wondering what Captain Corbet and the boys were doing.  That they were
searching for him everywhere he well knew, but which direction they had
chosen he could not tell.  And what was the place whither he had
drifted?  He felt confident that it was the mouth of the Petitcodiac,
and could not help wondering at the accuracy of his course; yet, while
wondering, he modestly refrained from taking the credit of it to
himself, and rather chose to attribute it to the wind and tide.  It was
by committing himself so completely to their guidance, he thought, that
he had done so well.

In the midst of such thoughts as these, Tom became aware of the howling
of the wind and the dash of the waters.  Putting forth his head, he
found that there was quite a storm arising; and this only added to his
contentment.  No fear had he now, on this solid ground, of rising wind
or swelling wave.  Even the fog had lost its terrors.  It was with
feelings like these that he once more covered up his head from the
night blast; and not long after he was once more asleep.

When he next awaked, it was day.  Starting to his feet, he looked
around him, and shouted for joy.  The sky was clear.  The sun was
rising, and its rays, coming from over the distant hills, were
glittering over the surface of the water.  The wind had changed. The
fog had dispersed.

No sooner had he seen this than he was filled with curiosity to know
where he was.  This did not look much like the mouth of the
Petitcodiac.  He stared around with a very strange sensation.

Immediately beside him, where he was standing, the easy slope went back
for a hundred yards or so, covered with short, wild grass, with here
and there a stunted tree.  Turning round, he saw the land rising by a
steep acclivity towards the heights which bordered on the sea in such
tremendous cliffs.  Over the heights, and along the crest of those
cliffs, were flying great flocks of sea-gulls, which kept up one
incessant chorus of harsh, discordant screams.  In front of him spread
out a broad sheet of water, on the opposite side of which arose a lofty
line of coast.  Into this there penetrated a long strait, beyond which
he could see broad waters and distant shores--a bay within a bay,
approached by this strait. On each side of the strait were lofty,
towering cliffs; and on one side, in particular, the cliffs were
perpendicular, and ran on in a long and unbroken wall.  The extremity
of the cliff nearest him was marked by a gigantic mass of broken rock,
detached from the main land, and standing alone in awful grandeur.

What place was this?  Was this the mouth of the Petitcodiac?  Was that
broad bay a river?  Was he still dreaming, or what did it all mean?
And that gigantic fragment severed from a cliff, which thus stood guard
at the entrance of a long strait, what was that?  Could it be possible?
Was there indeed any other broken cape, or could it be possible that
this was Cape Split?

He hurried up the slope, and on reaching the top, saw that it descended
on the other side towards the water.  This water was a broad sheet,
which extended for seven or eight miles, and was terminated by a lofty
coast that extended down the bay as far as the eye could reach.  One
comprehensive glance was sufficient.  He saw it all, and understood it
all.  It was not the mouth of the Petitcodiac River.  It was the
entrance to the Basin of Minas that lay before him.  There lay the
great landmarks, seen under new aspects, it is true, yet now
sufficiently distinguishable.  There was the Nova Scotia coast.  In
yonder hollow was Scott's Bay.  That giant rock was Cape Split.  The
long channel was the Strait of Minas, and the cliffs opposite were Cape
d'Or and Cape Chignecto.

And now the recognition of all these places brought to him a great and
sudden shock.

For what was this place on which he stood?  Was it any part of the main
land?

It was not.

He looked around.

It was an island.

He saw its lofty cliffs, its wooded crest, its flocks of sea-gulls, its
sloping east end, where he stood, running down to a low point. He had
seen them all at a distance before; and now that he stood here, he
recognized all.

He was on Ile Haute!

The moment that he recognized this startling fact, he thought of his
boat.  He hurried to the beach.  The tide was very low.  To his immense
relief he found the fastening of the boat secure, and he turned away at
once, without any further examination, to think over his situation, and
consider the best plan for reaching the main land.  Making a
comfortable seat for himself on the sail, he sat down, and drawing out
the box, he took some biscuit.  Then feeling thirsty, he went off in
search of fresh water.  Before he had walked many paces he found a
brook.

The brook was a small one, which ran from the lofty west end of the
island to the low land of the east, and thence into the bay.  The water
was good, and Tom satisfied his thirst by a long draught.

Judging by the position of the sun, it was now about seven o'clock in
the morning; and Tom seated himself once more, and began to try to
think how it was that he should have come in a direction so entirely
different from the one which he had believed himself to be taking.  He
had fully expected to land at Petitcodiac, and he found himself far
away on the other side of the bay.  Yet a little reflection showed him
how useless it was to try to recall his past voyage, and how impossible
it was for him to account for it, ignorant as he was of the true
direction of the wind and of the tide.  He contented himself with
marking a rude outline of his course on his memorandum book, making
allowance for the time when he turned on that course; and having summed
it all up to his own satisfaction in a crooked line which looked like a
slip-knot, he turned his attention to more important matters.

There was one matter of first-rate importance which now pressed itself
upon his thoughts, and that was, how to escape from his present
situation.  As far as he could see, there was no inhabitant on the
island, no house, no cultivation, and no domestic animal. If there had
been anything of that kind, they would be visible, he knew, from the
point where he was standing.  But all was deserted; and beyond the open
ground in his neighborhood arose the east end, wooded all over its
lofty summit.  From Captain Corbet's words, and from his own
observation, he knew that it was a desert island, and that if he wished
to escape he would have to rely altogether upon his own resources.

With this conclusion he once more turned his attention to his
surroundings.

Nearest to him was Cape d'Or, about four miles away, and Cape Split,
which was some distance farther.  Then there was the Nova Scotia shore,
which appeared to be seven or eight miles distant. On the beach and
within sight was the boat which offered a sure and easy mode of passing
over to the main land.  But no sooner did he recognize this fact than a
difficulty arose.  How was he to make the passage?  The boat had come
ashore at high tide, and was close up to the grassy bank.  The tide was
far down, and between the boat and the water was a broad beach, covered
with cobblestones, and interspersed with granite boulders.  It was too
heavy a weight for him to move any distance, and to force it down to
the water over such a beach was plainly impossible.  On the other hand,
he might wait until the boat floated at high tide, and then embark.
But this, again, would be attended with serious difficulties.  The
tide, he saw, would turn as soon as he should get fairly afloat, and
then he would have to contend with the downward current.  True, he
might use his sail, and in that case he might gain the Nova Scotia
shore; but his experience of the tides had been so terrible a one, that
he dreaded the tremendous drift which he would have to encounter, and
had no confidence in his power of navigating under such circumstances.
Besides, he knew well that although the wind was now from the north, it
was liable to change at any moment; so that even if he should be able
to guide his boat, he might yet be suddenly enveloped by a fog when but
half way over, and exposed once more to all those perils from which he
had just escaped.  The more he thought of all these dangers, the more
deterred he felt from making any such attempt.  Rather would he wait,
and hope for escape in some other way.

But, as yet, he did not feel himself forced to anything so desperate as
that.  There was another alternative.  At high tide the boat would be
afloat, and then, as the tide fell, he could keep her afloat until it
was at its lowest.  He could then embark, and be carried by the
returning water straight on to the Straits of Minas, and up into the
basin.  He now made a calculation, and concluded that it would be high
tide about midday, and low tide about six in the evening.  If he were
to embark at that time, he would have two hours of daylight in which to
run up with the tide. He saw now that his whole plan was perfectly
feasible, and it only remained to make preparations for the voyage.  As
the whole afternoon would be taken up in floating the boat down to
low-water mark, the morning would have to be employed in making
whatever arrangements might be necessary.

Certain things were needed which required all that time.  His hastily
extemporized mast and sail had done wonderfully well, but he needed
something to steer with.  If he could only procure something that would
serve the purpose of a rudder, he would feel well prepared for his
voyage.

On the search for this he now started.  He walked all about the open
ground, looking around in all directions, to see if he could find
anything, but without any success.  Then he ascended the declivity
towards the woods, but nothing appeared which was at all adapted to
meet his wants.  He saw a young tree, which he thought might do, and
tried to cut it down with his pocket-knife.  After about an hour's hard
work he succeeded in bringing it down, and another hour was spent in
trimming the branches.  The result of all this labor at length lay at
his feet in the shape of a rough pole, with jagged splinters sticking
out all over it, which promised to be of about as much utility as a
spruce bush.  In utter disgust he turned away, leaving the pole on the
ground, and making up his mind to sail, as he did before, without any
rudder.  In this mood he descended the declivity, and walked
disconsolately towards the shore which was on the side of the island
directly opposite to where the boat lay.  He had not yet been near
enough to see the beach; but now, as he came nearer, a cry of delight
escaped him involuntarily; for there, all along the beach, and close up
to the bank, lay an immense quantity of drift-wood, which had been
brought here by the tide from all the upper waters of the bay.  It was
a most heterogeneous mixture that lay before him--chips from timber
ponds, logs from ship-yards, boards from saw-mills, deals, battens,
fence posts, telegraph poles, deal ends, edgings, laths, palings,
railway sleepers, treenails, shingles, clapboards, and all the various
forms which wood assumes in a country which makes use of it as the
chief material of its manufactures.  Along the countless streams that
flow into the bay, and along its far-winding shores, and along the
borders of all its subsidiary bays, and inlets, and basins, the
manufacture of wood is carried on--in saw-mills, in ship-yards, and in
timber ponds; and the currents that move to and fro are always loaded
with the fragments that are snatched away from these places, most of
which are borne afar out to sea, but many of which are thrown all along
the shores for hundreds of miles.  Ile Haute, being directly in the way
of some of the swiftest currents, and close by the entrance to a basin
which is surrounded by mills and ship-yards, naturally received upon
its shores an immense quantity of these scattered and floating
fragments.  Such was the sight that now met the eyes of Tom, and
presented him with a countless number of fragments of wood adapted to
his wants, at the very time when he had worked fruitlessly for two
hours at fashioning one for himself.

Looking over the heaps of drift-wood, he found many pieces which suited
him; and out of these he chose one which was shaped a little like an
oar.  Securing this prize, he walked over to where the sail was, and
deposited it there.

Then he ate some biscuit, and, after taking a draught from the cool
brook, he rested, and waited, full of hope, for the rising of the tide.

It was now rapidly approaching the boat.  Tom watched it for some time,
and felt new happiness as he viewed the roll of every little surf.
There was not much wind, and nothing but a gentle ripple on the water.
All this was in his favor; for, if he wished for anything now, it was a
moderate breeze and a light sea.  From time to time he turned his
attention to the Straits of Minas, and arranged various plans in his
mind.  At one time he resolved to try and reach Pereau; again he
thought that he would be content if he could only get to Parrsboro';
and yet again, he came to the wise conclusion that if he got to any
settlement at all he would be content.  At another time he half decided
to take another course, and try to reach Scott's Bay, where he felt
sure of a warm welcome and a plenteous repast.  Aiming thus at so many
different points, it mattered but little to him in what particular
direction the tide might sweep him, so long as it carried him up the
bay.

The tide now came nearer, and Tom went down to the beach for a few
moments.  He paced the distance between the boat and the water.  He
noticed a few things lying in the boat.  In the bow was a coil of rope
which Captain Corbet had probably obtained when he was ashore at
Petitcodiac.  There was also a tin pan, used for baling.

As the tide drew nearer, Tom began to feel more and more impatient.
Again and again he paced the intervening space between the boat and the
water, and chafed and fretted because it did not lessen more rapidly.
If the boat were once fairly afloat, he felt that the time would pass
much more rapidly; for then he would be working at some definite task,
and not standing idly waiting.

But everything has an end; and so, at length, the end came here. The
water rose higher and higher, until, at length, it touched the keel.
Tom gave a shout of joy.

He now untied the rope, and tried to shorten his suspense by pushing
the boat towards the water; but his strength was insufficient.  He
could not move it.  He would have to wait longer.

Thus far the things which he had taken out had been lying on the grass.
It was now time to put them on board.  So he carried down the sail,
folded it up, and stowed it away neatly at the bottom of the boat.  On
this he stood the box of biscuit, taking care to put the cover over it,
and to spread over that again one fold of the sail.

This took up some time, and he had the gratification of seeing that the
water had come up a few feet farther.  He now tried once more to force
the boat down, using his piece of board as a lever; but the board bent,
and almost broke, without moving the boat.  He stood for a moment
waiting, and suddenly thought of the pole which he had left up in the
woods.  He determined to get this, and perhaps, with its help, he would
be able to accomplish his wishes. So off he started at a run, and in a
few minutes reached the place. Hurrying back again, he inserted one end
of the pole under the bow, and exerted all his force to press the boat
downward into the water.  At first it did not move; but shortly after,
when the water had risen still higher, he made a new effort.  This time
he succeeded; the boat moved slightly.

Again.

The boat moved farther.

Once more.

Still farther.

And now he made a final trial.  Thrusting the pole again underneath, he
exerted all his force for the last time, and pushed the boat down for
about a yard.

It was at last afloat.

The tide had not yet fully attained its height, but was close to it.
The wind was blowing from the north, as before, and quite moderately.
The sea sparkled and glittered in the rays of the sun. The little
wavelets tossed their heads on high, and danced far away ever the sea.
The air was bright, and stimulating, and exhilarating.  All the scene
filled Tom's heart with gladness; and the approach of his deliverance
deepened and intensified this feeling.