XVI.

A Sign for the outer World.--A Shelter for the Outcast's Head.--Tom's
Camp and Camp-bed.--A Search after Something to vary a too monotonous
Diet.--Brilliant Success.


Tom sat down after his eventful day, and took his evening meal, as has
been said.  He rested then for some time.  His excessive labors had
fatigued him less than the great excitement which he had undergone, and
now he felt disinclined to exert himself.  But the sun had set, and
darkness was coming on rapidly; so he rose, at last, and went over to
the drift-wood.  Here, after a search of about half an hour, he found
something which was very well suited to his purpose.  It was a piece of
scantling about twenty feet long, and not very thick; and to this he
saw that he could fasten the pole that he had made up in the woods.
These two pieces would make, when joined, a very good flag-staff.
These he brought up to the bank.  Then he collected an armful of dry
chips and sticks, which he carried over to a spot near where the boat
lay.  A rock was there, and against one side of this he built a pile of
the chips.  He then tried a match, and found that it was quite dry, and
lighted it without any difficulty.  With this he kindled the fire, and
soon saw, with great satisfaction, a bright and cheerful blaze.

He was so delighted with the fire that he brought up a dozen more loads
of wood, which he laid near.  Then he drew up the bit of scantling, and
bringing the coil of rope, he cut a piece off, and proceeded to fasten
to the scantling the pole which he had procured in the woods.  He did
this by winding the rope around in a close and even wind; and, finally,
on concluding his task, he found that it was bound firmly enough to
stand any breeze.  It took a long time to finish this; but Tom had
slept late in the morning, and, though fatigued, he was not sleepy.
After this he sat down in front of the fire, and enjoyed its friendly
light and its genial glow.  He kept heaping on the fuel, and the bright
flames danced up, giving to him the first approach to anything like the
feeling of comfort that he had known since he had drifted away from the
Antelope.  Nor was it comfort only that he was mindful of while he
watched and fed the fire.  He saw in this fire, as it shone out over
the water, the best kind of a signal, and had some hope of being seen
and hailed by some passing vessel.  In this hope he sat up till
midnight, looking out from time to time over the water, and expecting
every instant to see the shadow of some approaching vessel.

But midnight came, and Tom at length thought of sleep.  The sail had
dried thoroughly through the day; so now he used it once more as a
coverlet, and, folding himself in it, he reclined, as before, against
the mossy bank, and slept.

On awaking the next day, he arose and looked around.  To his deep
disappointment, he could see nothing.  There was a fog over all the
scene.  The wind had changed, and his old enemy was once more besieging
him.  It was not so thick, indeed, as it had been, being light and dry,
so that the ground was not at all moistened; but still the view was
obscured, so that no vessel could be seen unless it came within half a
mile; and that was rather closer than most vessels would care to come
to his island.

This day was Sunday, and all Tom's plans had to be deferred until the
following day.  However, it was not at all disagreeable to him to get
rid of the necessity of work; and, indeed, never before did he fully
appreciate the nature of the Day of Rest.  The rest was sweet indeed to
his exhausted and overworn frame, and he did not go far away from his
fire.  He had found some embers still glowing in the morning, and had
kindled the fire anew from these, without drawing any more upon his
precious store of matches.  He resolved now to keep the coals alive all
the time, by feeding the fire during the day, and covering it up with
ashes by night.

It was Sunday,--the Day of Rest,--and Tom felt all the blessedness of
rest.  On the whole, it turned out to be the pleasantest day which he
had known since he left the schooner.  Left now to quiet reflection, he
recalled the events of the last week, and had more leisure to feel
thankful over the wonderful safety which he had met with.  Even now on
the island he was not without his comforts.  He had food and warmth.
So, on the whole, though he had his moments of sadness, yet the sadness
was driven out by cheerfulness.  It was not all dismal.  The words of
that poem which is familiar to every school-boy rang in his ears:--

      "O, Solitude, where are the charms
          That sages have seen in thy face?
       Better dwell in the midst of alarms
          Than reign in this horrible place."


Yet these words were accompanied and counterbalanced by the more
pleasing and consoling sentiments of others, which on this day accorded
better with Tom's mood:--

      "There's mercy in every place;
          And mercy--encouraging thought!--
       Gives even affliction a grace,
          And reconciles man to his lot."


Nothing occurred during the day to disturb the quiet of the island, and
Tom went to bed early that night, so as to have a long sleep, and
fortify himself for the labors of the morrow.  The ashes were raked
carefully round the coals, which, when Tom waked in the morning, were
easily kindled again.

He was up early on that Monday morning.  He saw, with deep
disappointment, that the fog still covered every thing, and that the
wind was blowing quite brisk from the south-west, and raising rather a
heavy sea.  But he had a great deal to do now, and to this he turned
his attention.

First of all, he had to finish his signal-staff and set it up.  He was
very much troubled about the proper material for a flag.  The canvas
was rather too heavy; but as he had nothing else, he had to take this.
He fastened a bit of the rope to the head of the staff, so as to form a
loop, and through this he ran a piece which was long enough to serve
for halyards.  Thus far he had not used up more than a quarter of the
coil of rope; but he needed all that was left for other purposes.  The
next thing was to set up his staff. To do this required much labor.  He
had already selected the place which seemed most suitable.  It was at
the extreme point of a tongue of land which projected beside the brook,
and only a little distance from his resting-place.  Here the ground was
soft; and choosing a sharp stone, he worked diligently for about a
couple of hours, until at length he succeeded in digging a hole which
was about eighteen inches in depth.  Then he fastened ropes to the
staff, where the pole joined it, so that four lines came down far
enough to serve as stays.  Having done this, he inserted the end of the
staff in the hole, and thrust in the earth all around it, trampling it
in, and beating it down as tight as he could with a stone.  After this
he procured some sticks from the drift-wood, and, sharpening the ends,
he secured the stays by fastening them to these sticks, which he drove
into the ground.  The staff then seemed to be as secure as was
necessary.  It only remained now to hoist up his flag; and this he did
without any difficulty, securing it at half mast, so that it might
serve unmistakably as a signal of distress.

Upon completing this, Tom rested on the mound, and from that distance
he contemplated the signal with a great deal of calm and quiet
satisfaction.  It was his own device, and his own handiwork, and he was
very proud of it.  But he did not allow himself a long rest.  There yet
remained much to be done, and to this he now directed his attention.

He had been thinking, during his last employment, upon the necessity
which he had of some shelter.  A plan had suggested itself which he
felt confident that he could carry into execution without any very
great trouble.  The fog that now prevailed, and which was far different
from the light mist of the previous day, accompanied also, as it was,
by the damp south-west wind, made some sort of a shelter imperatively
necessary, and that, too, before another night.  To pass this night in
the fog would be bad enough; but if it should happen to rain also, his
situation would be miserable indeed.

He now set out for the beach, and found, without much difficulty, some
pieces of wood which were necessary to his purpose.  Bringing these
back, he next looked about for a good situation.  There was a rock not
far from the fire, and in front of this was a smooth spot, where the
land was flat, and covered with short grass.  On the left it sloped to
the brook.  This seemed to him to be the best place on the island.  It
was sufficiently sheltered.  It was dry, and in case of rain the water
would not be likely to flood it.  With all these it also possessed the
advantage of being sufficiently conspicuous to any passing vessel which
might be attracted by the signal-staff.  Here, then, Tom determined to
erect his place of residence.

His first work was to select two long and slender pieces of wood, and
sharpen the ends of them.  Then he drove each of them into the ground
in such a way that their tops crossed one another.  These he bound fast
together.  Two other stakes were driven into the ground, and secured in
the same way, about six or seven feet off.  Another long piece of
scantling was then placed so as to pass from one to the other of the
two crossed sticks, so that it rested upon them. This last was bound
tight to the crossed sticks, and thus the whole structure formed a
camp-shaped frame.

Over this Tom now threw the sail, and brought it down to the ground on
either side, securing it there with pegs.  At the back of the camp a
piece of the sail was folded over and secured so as to cover it in;
while in front another piece of the sail hung down until it nearly
reached the ground.  This could hang down at night, and be folded over
the top by day.  Tom now tore up some sods, and laid them over the edge
of the canvas on each side, where it touched the ground, and placed on
these heavy stones, until at length it seemed sufficiently protected
from the entrance of any rain that might flow down the roof.  His last
task consisted in collecting a large quantity of moss and ferns from
the woods, which he strewed over the ground inside, and heaped up at
one end, so as to form a soft and fragrant bed.  When this was
accomplished the camp was finished.

It had taken a long time, and when at last the work was done, it began
to grow dark.  Tom noticed this with surprise.  He had been working so
incessantly that he was not mindful of the flight of time, and now the
day was done, and the evening was upon him before he was aware.  But
there were other things still for him to do before he could rest from
his labors.  His fire was just flickering around its last embers, and
if he wished to have a pleasant light to cheer the solitude and the
darkness of his evening hours, it would be necessary to prepare a
supply of fuel.  To this he attended at once, and brought up several
armfuls of drift-wood from the beach.  Placing these near the fire, he
kindled it up afresh, and flung upon the rising flames a generous
supply of fuel.  The fires caught at it, and crackled as they spread
through the dry wood, and tossed up their forked tongues on high, till
in the dusk of evening they illuminated the surrounding scene with a
pleasant light.  A few more armfuls were added, and then the work for
the day was over.  That work had been very extensive and very
important.  It had secured a means of communication with the outer
world, and had also formed a shelter from the chill night air, the fog,
and the storm.  It was with a very natural pride that Tom cast his eyes
around, and surveyed the results of his ingenuity and his industry.

The camp opened towards the fire, from which it was not so far distant
but that Tom could attend to it without any very great inconvenience.
The fire shone pleasantly before him as he sat down at his evening
repast.  As the darkness increased, it threw a ruddier glow upon all
the scene around, lighting up field and hill, and sending long streams
of radiance into the fog that overhung the sea.  Tom had prepared an
unusually large supply of fuel, this evening, for the express purpose
of burning it all up; partly for his own amusement, and partly in the
hope that it might meet the eyes of some passing navigator.  It was his
only hope.  To keep his signals going by night and day was the surest
plan of effecting a speedy escape.  Who could tell what might be out on
the neighboring sea?  How did he know but that the Antelope might be
somewhere near at hand, with his companions on board, cruising
anxiously about in search after the missing boat?  He never ceased to
think that they were following after him somewhere, and to believe
that, in the course of their wanderings, they might come somewhere
within sight of him.  He knew that they would never give him up till
they assuredly knew his fate, but would follow after him, and set other
vessels on the search, till the whole bay, with all its shores and
islands, should be thoroughly ransacked.

Fortunate was it for him, he thought, that there was so large a supply
of drift-wood at hand on the beach, dry, portable, and in every way
convenient for use.  Thanks to this, he might now disperse the gloom of
dark and foggy nights, and keep up a better signal in the dark than he
could do in the light.  Thus the fuel was heaped on, and the fire
flamed up, and Tom sat near, looking complacently upon the brilliant
glow.

Thus far, for nearly a week, he had fed on biscuit only; but now, as he
ate his repast, he began to think that it was a very monotonous fare,
and to wonder whether it might not be possible to find something which
could give a zest to his repasts.  The biscuit were holding out well,
but still he felt a desire to husband his resources, and if any
additional food could in any way be procured, it would not only be a
relish, but would also lessen his demand upon his one sole source of
supply.  He thought earnestly upon the subject of fish.  He turned his
thoughts very seriously to the subject of fish-hooks, and tried to
think of some way by which he could capture some of the fish with which
these waters abounded. But this idea did not seem to promise much.  In
the first place, he could think of no possible way in which he could
procure any serviceable hook; in the second place, even if he had a
hook and line all ready and baited, he did not see how he would be able
to cast it within reach of any fish.  His boat would not float him even
for the little distance that was required to get into the places where
fish might be.  He could only stand upon the beach out of their reach.

But, in the course of his thoughts, he soon perceived that other
sources of food were possible to him besides the fish that were caught
by hook and line.  His mind reverted to the populous realm of
shell-fish.  These were all before him.  Round the rocks and amid the
sea-weed there certainly must be mussels.  At low tide, amid the ledges
and the sand, there surely must be some lobsters. Before him there was
an extensive mud flat, where there ought to be clams.  Here was his
fire, always ready, by night and by day.  Why should he not be able to
make use of that fire, not only for cheering his mind, and giving him
warmth, and signaling to passers-by, but also for cooking his meals?

This was the question that he asked himself as he ate his biscuit. He
could not see why he should not be able to accomplish this.  As far as
he could see, there ought to be plenty of shell-fish of various kinds
on these shores.  The more he thought of it, the more probable it
seemed.  He determined to solve the difficulty as soon as possible.  On
former occasions he had arranged his work on the evening for the
succeeding day.  On this evening he marked out this work for the
morrow, and arranged in his mind a comprehensive and most diligent
search for shell-fish, which should embrace the whole circuit of the
island.

With this in his mind, he arranged the fire as usual, so as to keep it
alive, and then retired to his camp for the night.  The presence of a
roof over his head was grateful in the extreme.  He let down the canvas
folds over the entrance, and felt a peculiar sense of security and
comfort.  The moss and ferns which he had heaped up were luxuriously
soft and deliciously fragrant.  Over these he stretched his wearied
limbs with a sigh of relief, and soon was asleep.

So comfortable was his bed, and so secure his shelter, that he slept
longer than usual.  It was late when he awaked.  He hurried forth and
looked around.  The fog still rested over everything.  If possible it
was thicker and more dismal than even on the preceding day.  To his
surprise, he soon noticed that it had been raining quite heavily
through the night.  Around, in many places, he saw pools of water, and
in the hollows of the rocks he saw the same. This could only have been
done by the rain.  Going back to his camp, he saw that the canvas was
quite wet.  And yet the rain had all rolled off.  Not a drop had
entered.  The moss and the fern inside were perfectly dry, and he had
not the slightest feeling of dampness about him.  His camp was a
complete success.

He now went off to search for clams.  The tide had been high at about
six in the morning.  It was now, as he judged, about ten or eleven, and
the water was quite low.  Selecting a piece of shingle from his
wood-pile, he walked down over the mud flat that extended from the
point, and, after going a little distance, he noticed the holes that
give indications of the presence of clams beneath. Turning up the sand,
he soon threw out some of them.  He now dug in several different
places, and obtained sufficient for the day. These he carried back to
the bank in triumph.  Then he stirred up his fire, heaped on plenty of
wood, and arranged his clams in front so as to roast them.

In spite of Mrs. Pratt's theories, the clams were found by Tom to be
delicious, and gave such relish to the biscuit, that he began to think
whether he could not make use of the baling dipper, and make a clam
chowder.

This breakfast was a great success, and Tom now confidently expected to
find other shell-fish, by means of which his resources might be
enlarged and improved.