III.

Solomon surpasses himself.--A Period of Joy is generally followed by a
Time of Sorrow.--Gloomy Forebodings.--The Legend of Petticoat
Jack.--Captain Corbet discourses of the Dangers of the Deep, and puts
in Practice a new and original Mode of Navigation.


This interruption put an end to their attempts at fishing, and was
succeeded by another interruption of a more pleasing character, in the
shape of dinner, which was now loudly announced by Solomon. For some
time a savory steam had been issuing from the lower regions, and had
been wafted to their nostrils in successive puffs, until at last their
impatient appetite had been roused to the keenest point, and the
enticing fragrance had suggested all sorts of dishes.  When at length
the summons came, and they went below, they found the dinner in every
way worthy of the occasion. Solomon's skill never was manifested more
conspicuously than on this occasion; and whether the repast was judged
of by the quantity or the quality of the dishes, it equally deserved to
be considered as one of the masterpieces of the distinguished artist
who had prepared it.

"Dar, chil'en," he exclaimed, as they took their places, "dar, cap'en,
jes tas dem ar trout, to begin on, an see if you ever saw anythin to
beat 'em in all your born days.  Den try de stew, den de meat pie, den
de calf's head; but dat ar pie down dar mustn't be touched, nor eben so
much as looked at, till de las ob all."

And with these words Solomon stepped back, leaning both hands on his
hips, and surveyed the banquet and the company with a smile of serene
and ineffable complacency.

"All right, Solomon, my son," said Bart.  "Your dinner is like
yourself--unequalled and unapproachable."

"Bless you, bless you, my friend," murmured Bruce, in the intervals of
eating; "if there is any contrast between this present voyage and
former ones, it is all due to our unequalled caterer."

"How did you get the trout, Solomon?" said Phil.

"De trout?  O, I picked 'em up last night down in de village," said
Solomon.  "Met little boy from Gaspereaux, an got 'em from him."

"What's this?" cried Tom, opening a dish--"not lobster!"

"Lobster!" exclaimed Phil.

"So it is."

"Why, Solomon, where did you get lobster?"

"Is this the season for them?"

"Think of the words of the poet, boys," said Bart, warningly,--

          "In the months without the R,
           Clams and lobsters pison are."


Solomon meanwhile stood apart, grinning from ear to ear, with his
little black beads of eyes twinkling with merriment.

"Halo, Solomon!  What do you say to lobsters in July?"

Solomon's head wagged up and down, as though he were indulging in some
quiet, unobtrusive laughter, and it was some time before he replied.

"O, neber you fear, chil'en," he said; "ef you're only goin to get sick
from lobsters, you'll live a long day.  You may go in for clams, an
lobsters, an oysters any time ob de yeah you like,--ony dey mus be
cooked up proper."

"I'm gratified to hear that," said Bruce, gravely, "but at the same
time puzzled.  For Mrs. Pratt says the exact opposite; and so here we
have two great authorities in direct opposition.  So what are we to
think?"

"O, there's no difficulty," said Arthur, "for the doctors are not of
equal authority.  Mrs. Pratt is a quack, but Solomon is a
professional--a regular, natural, artistic, and scientific cook, which
at sea is the same as doctor."

The dinner was prolonged to an extent commensurate with its own
inherent excellence and the capacity of the boys to appreciate it; but
at length, like all things mortal, it came to a termination, and the
company went up once more to the deck.  On looking round it was evident
to all that a change had taken place.

Four miles away lay Ile Haute, and eight or ten miles beyond this lay
the long line of Nova Scotia.  It was now about four o'clock, and the
tide had been rising for three hours, and was flowing up rapidly, and
in a full, strong current.  As yet there was no wind, and the broad
surface of the bay was quite smooth and unruffled. In the distance and
far down the bay, where its waters joined the horizon, there was a kind
of haze, that rendered the line of separation between sea and sky very
indistinct.  The coast of Nova Scotia was at once enlarged and
obscured.  It seemed now elevated to an unusual height above the sea
line, as though it had been suddenly brought several miles nearer, and
yet, instead of being more distinct, was actually more obscure.  Even
Ile Haute, though so near, did not escape.  Four miles of distance were
not sufficient to give it that grand indistinctness which was now flung
over the Nova Scotia coast; yet much of the mysterious effect of the
haze had gathered about the island; its lofty cliffs seemed to tower on
high more majestically, and to lean over more frowningly; its fringe of
black sea-weed below seemed blacker, while the general hue of the
island had changed from a reddish color to one of a dull slaty blue.

"I don't like this," said Captain Corbet, looking down the bay and
twisting up his face as he looked.

"Why not?"

Captain Corbet shook his head.

"What's the matter?"

"Bad, bad, bad!" said the captain.

"Is there going to be a storm?"

"Wuss!"

"Worse?  What?"

"Fog."

"Fog?"

"Yes, hot an heavy, thick as puddin, an no mistake.  I tell you what it
is, boys: judgin from what I see, they've got a bran-new steam injine
into that thar fog mill at Grand Manan; an the way they're goin to
grind out the fog this here night is a caution to mariners."

Saying this, he took off his hat, and holding it in one hand, he
scratched his venerable head long and thoughtfully with the other.

"But I don't see any fog as yet," said Bart.

"Don't see it?  Wal, what d'ye call all that?" said the captain, giving
a grand comprehensive sweep with his arm, so as to take in the entire
scene.

"Why, it's clear enough."

"Clear?  Then let me tell you that when you see a atmosphere like this
here, then you may expect to see it any moment changed into deep, thick
fog.  Any moment--five minutes 'll be enough to snatch everything from
sight, and bury us all in the middle of a unyversal fog bank."

"What'll we do?"

"Dew?  That's jest the question."

"Can we go on?"

"Wal--without wind--I don't exactly see how.  In a fog a wind is not
without its advantages.  That's one of the times when the old Antelope
likes to have her sails up; but as we hain't got no wind, I don't think
we'll do much."

"Will you stay here at anchor?"

"At anchor?  Course not.  No, sir.  Moment the tide falls again, I'll
drift down so as to clear that pint there,--Cape Chignecto,--then
anchor; then hold on till tide rises; and then drift up. Mebbe before
that the wind 'll spring up, an give us a lift somehow up the bay."

"How long before the tide will turn?"

"Wal, it'll be high tide at about a quarter to eight this evenin, I
calc'late."

"You'll drift in the night, I suppose."

"Why not?"

"O, I didn't know but what the fog and the night together might be too
much for you."

"Too much?  Not a bit of it.  Fog, and night, and snow-storms, an tide
dead agin me, an a lee shore, are circumstances that the Antelope has
met over an over, an fit down.  As to foggy nights, when it's as calm
as this, why, they're not wuth considerin."

Captain Corbet's prognostication as to the fog proved to be correct.
It was only for a short time that they were allowed to stare at the
magnified proportions of the Nova Scotia coast and Ile Haute.  Then a
change took place which attracted all their attention.

The change was first perceptible down the bay.  It was first made
manifest by the rapid appearance of a thin gray cloud along the
horizon, which seemed to take in both sea and sky, and absorbed into
itself the outlines of both.  At the same time, the coast of Nova
Scotia grew more obscure, though it lost none of its magnified
proportions, while the slaty blue of Ile Haute changed to a grayer
shade.

This change was rapid, and was followed by other changes.  The thin
gray cloud, along the south-west horizon, down the bay, gradually
enlarged itself; till it grew to larger and loftier proportions. In a
quarter of an hour it had risen to the dimensions of the Nova Scotia
coast.  In a half an hour it was towering to double that height.  In an
hour its lofty crest had ascended far up into the sky.

"It's a comin," said Captain Corbet.  "I knowed it.  Grind away, you
old fog mill!  Pile on the steam, you Grand Mananers!"

"Is there any wind down there?"

"Not a hooter."

"Is the fog coming up without any wind?"

"Course it is.  What does the fog want of wind?"

"I thought it was the wind that brought it along."

"Bless your heart, the fog takes care of itself.  The wind isn't a bit
necessary.  It kine o' pervades the hull atmosphere, an rolls itself on
an on till all creation is overspread.  Why, I've seen everything
changed from bright sunshine to the thickest kind of fog in fifteen
minutes,--yea, more,--and in five minutes."

Even while they were speaking the fog rolled on, the vast accumulation
of mist rose higher and yet higher, and appeared to draw nearer with
immense rapidity.  It seemed as though the whole atmosphere was
gradually becoming condensed, and precipitating its invisible watery
vapor so as to make it visible in far-extending fog banks.  It was not
wind, therefore, that brought on the clouds, for the surface of the
water was smooth and unruffled, but it was the character of the
atmosphere itself from which this change was wrought.  And still, as
they looked at the approaching mist, the sky overhead was blue, and the
sun shone bright.  But the gathering clouds seemed now to have gained a
greater headway, and came on more rapidly.  In a few minutes the whole
outline of the Nova Scotia coast faded from view, and in its place
there appeared a lofty wall of dim gray cloud, which rose high in the
air, fading away into the faintest outline.  Overhead, the blue sky
became rapidly more obscured; Ile Haute changed again from its grayish
blue to a lighter shade, and then became blended with the impenetrable
fog that was fast enclosing all things; and finally the clouds grew
nearer, till the land nearest them was snatched from view, and all
around was alike shrouded under the universal veil; nothing whatever
was visible.  For a hundred yards, or so, around them, they could see
the surface of the water; but beyond this narrow circle, nothing more
could be discerned.

"It's a very pooty fog," said Captain Corbet, "an I only wonder that
there ain't any wind.  If it should come, it'll be all right."

"You intend, then, to go on just the same."

"Jest the same as ef the sky was clear.  I will up anchor as the tide
begins to fall, an git a good piece down, so as to dodge Cape
Chegnecto, an there wait for the rising tide, an jest the same as ef
the sun was shinin.  But we can't start till eight o'clock this evenin.
Anyhow, you needn't trouble yourselves a mite.  You may all go to
sleep, an dream that the silver moon is guidin the traveller on the
briny deep."

The scene now was too monotonous to attract attention, and the boys
once more sought for some mode of passing the time.  Nothing appeared
so enticing as their former occupation of fishing, and to this they
again turned their attention.  In this employment the time passed away
rapidly until the summons was given for tea. Around the festive board,
which was again prepared by Solomon with his usual success, they
lingered long, and at length, when they arose, the tide was high.  It
was now about eight o'clock in the evening, and Captain Corbet was all
ready to start.  As the tide was now beginning to turn, and was on the
ebb, the anchor was raised, and the schooner, yielding to the pressure
of the current, moved away from her anchorage ground.  It was still
thick, and darkness also was coming on.  Not a thing could be
discerned, and by looking at the water, which moved with the schooner,
it did not seem as though any motion was made.

"That's all your blindness," said the captain, as they mentioned it to
him.  "You can't see anything but the water, an as it is movin with us,
it doesn't seem as though we were movin.  But we air, notwithstandin,
an pooty quick too.  I'll take two hours' drift before stoppin, so as
to make sure.  I calc'late about that time to get to a place whar I can
hit the current that'll take me, with the risin tide, up to old
Petticoat Jack."

"By the way, captain," said Phil, "what do you seafaring men believe
about the origin of that name--Petitcodiac?  Is it Indian or French?"

"'Tain't neither," said Captain Corbet, decidedly.  "It's good English;
it's 'Petticoat Jack;' an I've hearn tell a hundred times about its
original deryvation.  You see, in the old French war, there was an
English spy among the French, that dressed hisself up as a woman, an
was familiarly known, among the British generals an others that emply'd
him, as 'Petticoat Jack.'  He did much to contriboot to the defeat of
the French; an arter they were licked, the first settlers that went up
thar called the place, in honor of their benefacture, 'Petticoat Jack;'
an it's bore that name ever sence.  An people that think it's French,
or Injine, or Greek, or Hebrew, or any other outlandish tongue, don't
know what they're talkin about.  Now, I KNOW, an I assure you what I've
ben a sayin's the gospel terewth, for I had it of an old seafarin man
that's sailed this bay for more'n forty year, an if he ain't good
authority, then I'd like to know who is--that's all."

At this explanation of the etymology of the disputed term, the boys
were silent, and exchanged glances of admiration.

It was some minutes after eight when they left their anchorage, and
began to drift once more.  There was no moon, and the night would have
been dark in any case, but now the fog rendered all things still more
obscure.  It had also grown much thicker than it had been.  At first it
was composed of light vapors, which surrounded them on all sides, it is
true, but yet did not have that dampness which might have been
expected.  It was a light, dry fog, and for two or three hours the
deck, and rigging, and the clothes of those on board remained quite
dry.  But now, as the darkness increased, the fog became denser, and
was more surcharged with heavy vapors. Soon the deck looked as though
it had received a shower of rain, and the clothes of those on board
began to be penetrated with the chill damp.

"It's very dark, captain," said Bruce, at last, as the boys stood near
the stern.

"Dradful dark," said the captain, thoughtfully.

"Have you really a good idea of where we are?"

"An idee?  Why, if I had a chart,--which I haven't, cos I've got it all
mapped out in my head,--but if I had one, I could take my finger an
pint the exact spot where we are a driftin this blessed minute."

"You're going straight down the bay, I suppose."

"Right--yea, I am; I'm goin straight down; but I hope an trust, an
what's more, I believe, I am taking a kine o' cant over nigher the New
Brunswick shore."

"How long will we drift?"

"Wal, for about two hours--darsn't drift longer; an besides, don't want
to."

"Why not?"

"Darsn't.  Thar's a place down thar that every vessel on this here bay
steers clear of, an every navigator feels dreadful shy of."

"What place is that?"

"Quaco Ledge," said Captain Corbet, in a solemn tone.  "We'll get as
near it as is safe this night, an p'aps a leetle nearer; but, then, the
water's so calm and still, that it won't make any difference--in fact,
it wouldn't matter a great deal if we came up close to it."

"Quaco Ledge?" said Bruce.  "I've heard of that."

"Heard of it?  I should rayther hope you had.  Who hasn't?  It's the
one great, gen'ral, an standin terror of this dangerous and iron-bound
bay.  There's no jokin, no nonsense about Quaco Ledge; mind I tell you."

"Where does it lie?" asked Phil, after a pause.

"Wal, do you know whar Quaco settlement is?"

"Yes."

"Wal, Quaco Ledge is nigh about half way between Quaco settlement and
Ile Haute, bein a'most in the middle of the bay, an in a terrible
dangerous place for coasters, especially in a fog, or in a snow-storm.
Many's the vessel that's gone an never heard of, that Quaco Ledge could
tell all about, if it could speak.  You take a good snowstorm in this
Bay of Fundy, an let a schooner get lost in it, an not know whar she
is, an if Quaco Ledge don't bring her up all standin, then I'm a
Injine."

"Is it a large place?"

"Considerably too large for comfort," said the captain.  "They've
sounded it, an found the whole shoal about three an a half mile long,
an a half a mile broad.  It's all kivered over with water at high tide,
but at half tide it begins to show its nose, an at low tide you see as
pooty a shoal for shipwrecking as you may want; rayther low with
pleasant jagged rocks at the nothe-east side, an about a hundred yards
or so in extent.  I've been nigh on to it in clear weather, but don't
want to be within five miles of it in a fog or in a storm.  In a thick
night like this, I'll pull up before I get close."

"You've never met with any accident there, I suppose."

"Me?  No, not me.  I always calc'late to give Quaco Ledge the widest
kine o' berth.  An I hope you'll never know anythin more about that
same place than what I'm tellin you now.  The knowlege which one has
about that place, an places ginrally of that kine, comes better by
hearsay than from actool observation."

Time passed on, and they still drifted, and at length ten o'clock came;
but before that time the boys had gone below, and retired for the
night.  Shortly after, the rattle of the chains waked them all, and
informed them that the Antelope had anchored once more.

After this they all fell asleep.