                              CHAPTER IX.
                     THE POWER OF A SUPERIOR MIND.


Near noon Saturday a steam yacht ran into Fardale harbor and lay
alongside the wharf to coal. This yacht was the property of Mrs.
Arlington. During the game June had invited Doris Templeton to accompany
her on board the yacht that evening.

“I will call for you at Lakeside Academy,” said June. “If you can go, I
will take you over in a carriage.”

Doris readily agreed to go if possible.

June was on hand according to agreement, and Doris was able to accompany
her. As they were driving away from the academy, June said:

“I wasn’t sure you would come. I almost thought you might not.”

To the surprise of Doris, it seemed as if there was something of
disappointment and regret in her companion’s voice.

“Why, don’t you want me to?” she asked in surprise.

“Oh, yes—yes, of course.”

Still Doris was not satisfied, and a feeling of uneasiness began to
creep over her. Having reached the wharf at which the yacht lay, they
left the carriage and went on board. The captain was on hand and
apparently expecting them. He escorted them to the cabin.

Somehow June seemed strangely nervous and excited; Doris fancied she was
not at all like herself. The yacht was commodious and comfortable,
although not extremely large, and it interested Doris exceedingly.
Indeed, she was so absorbed in looking about that she did not notice a
strange tremor of movement which ran over the craft. June observed it,
and her face paled, but she said nothing.

At length Doris noted with surprise that something of a suspicious
nature was happening.

“Why—what is it?” she questioned, looking at June in alarm. “The yacht
is moving! How is that?”

Even as she spoke a boy appeared in the doorway and bowed smilingly.

“It means that we are going to take a little cruise,” he declared. “I am
delighted to have such agreeable company.”

It was Chet Arlington!

Doris turned even paler than June.

“Chester Arlington,” she cried, “you don’t mean that? You can’t mean it!
Why, you wouldn’t dare!”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“It’s plain you don’t know me. I have taken a fancy to make a little
cruise on this yacht, and, of course, I am not to blame if you chance to
be aboard at the time, I am sure you will enjoy it. You can’t help it. I
will do my best to make it pleasant for you.”

At this June suddenly sprang toward her brother.

“Chester!” she exclaimed, catching her breath; “you promised me——”

“Oh, never mind. That’s all right, sis. Don’t get excited.”

“But you promised me we would take a run only a short distance and then
return.”

“I have not said how far we are going,” he coolly answered. “But it
seems to me we may not be able to get back into the harbor to-night.
It’s a little dangerous after dark.”

“You can get back if you can get out.”

“We will talk that over later. Make yourselves at home, girls.”

“Chester, order Captain Long to run back at once!” cried June.

“Sorry I can’t oblige you, sis.”

“You won’t do it for me?” she questioned.

“No, not even for you, June.”

“Perhaps he will do it for me,” said a calm voice, and the sound of that
voice caused Chester to give a mighty start and turn, his own face
blanching.

Another boy had descended the companionway and stood just outside the
door.

“Merriwell!” gasped Chet.

“Exactly,” said Dick.

“How did you get on board?”

“Never mind that now,” said the uninvited guest, as his dark eyes were
steadily fixed on Chester. “I want you to give your captain immediate
orders to run back to the wharf!”

“Hanged if I do!”

“But you will!”

“I won’t!”

Another step Dick took, and this brought him into the cabin, where the
light was full and fair upon his face. In his dark eyes there was a
strange magnetic power which Arlington felt. Chester experienced a queer
thrill and gazed in fascination at those intense eyes. Dick lifted his
hand and seemed by some marvelous power to keep Chet’s gaze steady and
unmoved.

The two girls looked on in awe, feeling that between these lads there
was now a mighty battle of minds. Arlington felt that his own
determination was weakening and surrendering. He struggled to the last,
but was not equal to the conflict.

Finally Dick spoke once more, and to Chester it seemed that the words he
uttered came from a great distance.

“Chester Arlington, a week ago you told Doris Templeton something about
me. Did you tell her the truth, or did you lie?”

“I lied!” was the whispered reply.

“Now,” said Dick, stepping forward and taking Chester’s arm, “we will go
and tell the captain to put back to the wharf.”

Arlington permitted Merriwell to lead him from the cabin.

“Oh, June!” palpitated Doris, “I don’t understand it yet! Can’t you
explain?”

“Yes, I will,” said June, although it plainly cost her a great effort.
“Chester made me promise to bring you on board. He threatened to do
something reckless if I didn’t. He said he would simply back off into
the harbor as a joke. But I feared he might not be telling the truth. I
was afraid I couldn’t trust him, and I sent a note to Dick Merriwell,
asking him to come on board. I also arranged with the captain that he
should be permitted to do so. That’s how he happened to be here.”

“June,” said Doris, “do you think Dick will make the captain turn back?”

“I think my brother will give that order, as Dick requested. Let’s go on
deck.”

When they reached the deck they discovered that the yacht was already
slackening headway. It came to a full stop, backed up a short distance,
and then swung slowly around.

The girls stood, each with an arm about the other, as the dark buildings
on shore drew nearer and nearer. At length, with the sound of signal
bells in the engine room, the yacht came softly to the wharf, and two
sailors threw out a plank after the hawsers were made fast.

Dick appeared before June and Doris, while in the background was seen
the form of another boy, who stood there without approaching or
interfering.

“Come, Doris,” said Merriwell, “I will take you to the academy. June,
you did well to write me that note and arrange it for me to come aboard.
Good night, June!”

“Good night, Dick!” she murmured. “Good night, Doris!”

They passed over the plank, and the gloom on shore soon hid them from
June’s eyes.