CHAPTER IV

     "Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren
     ground.... The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry
     death."
     --TEMPEST.


By midnight the _Gem of the Ocean_ was well out in the Sound. A stiff
breeze was now blowing, and the little craft was footing it at a rapid
rate. Handy was now in his native element. He and his company felt that
they had turned a clever trick. It was an achievement worthy of the most
accomplished barnstormer. The idea of playing the town on the other
fellow's paper, ye gods! it was an accomplishment to feel proud of;
something to be stored away in the memory; something to be set aside for
future use when nights were long and congenial companions were gathered
about a cheerful fireside to listen to stories of days gone by.

Supper disposed of, the company were grouped together near the
companionway smoking the pipes of peace and anxious to discuss the next
managerial move. Handy, of course, was the prime mover in all
things--the one man to whom they all looked to pilot them safely through
the difficulties they expected to encounter. So far they considered he
had made good. He appeared to be in the best of spirits. Seated on an
up-turned bucket, drawing meditatively on his well-seasoned briarwood,
he looked a perfect picture of content. Not so, however, the "little
'un," as the boys playfully addressed the dwarf. The motion of the
vessel did not harmonize with peculiarities of his interior
arrangements, and unless the _Gem_ stopped rolling and pitching there
was evidently trouble ahead. Matters were approaching a crisis with him.
He had little or nothing to say. In fact, he was doing his best, as he
afterwards admitted, to keep his spirits up while he manfully struggled
to keep material matter down.

"Is it always as rough as this, Handy?" he asked in a plaintive voice.

"Rough as this, eh, my bold buccaneer," responded Handy, cheerily;
"rough as this? Why, there's scarcely a whitecap on the water. You ain't
going to be seasick, are you? Well, at any rate, if you are, possibly it
may be all for the best. 'Twill make a new man of you."

"Maybe he don't want to be made a new man of," suggested the low comedy
man.

"Oh, cork up and give us a rest," appealed the Little 'Un, somewhat
testily. "I'm all right, only I don't relish the confounded motion of
the craft. First she rocks one way, then another, and then again she
seems to have the fidgets, and pitches in fits and starts. I don't see
any sense in it. Steamboats don't cut up such capers, at least, none of
those that I've had any experience with."

"Brace up, my hearty," said Handy, removing the briarwood from his lips.
"Brace up. You'll feel all right anon."

"Anon isn't half bad," again jocularly interposed the comedy gentleman.

The wind was gradually freshening. There was by this time quite a sea
on, and the Little 'Un was beginning to succumb to the influence of
prevailing conditions. A sudden gust struck the _Gem_, and, yielding to
it, the group that was sitting so contentedly a few seconds before about
the companionway went rolling in a heap down to leeward in the cockpit.
This was altogether too much for the Little 'Un. He picked himself
together as well as he could, and doubled over the rail, Handy holding
on to his extremities. It was a trying scene for a time, and Handy had
the worst of it.

"Steady there, now, old fellow, you'll feel all serene when you give up.
There's no danger."

A minute or so later the poor little chap was taken from the rail as
limp as a wet rag, and was stretched out on the deck with a coil of rope
for a pillow.

"When you get me on a snap of this kind again," he began in a feeble
voice, after he had somewhat recovered, "you just let me know. No more
water adventures for me. I know when I have had enough. Dry land for
mine hereafter."

Handy endeavored to console and cheer him up, but in vain. The poor
sufferer was completely used up. He had yielded his gross receipts to
Neptune, and would, at that particular moment, have mortgaged his
prospects in the future to have been able to set foot on terra firma.
With some little difficulty Handy and one of the crew succeeded in
getting him below and stowed him away in a bunk.

The wind increased during the night, and by two in the morning it was
blowing a half-gale. The _Gem_ was trimmed down to close reefs, and all
but the crew and Handy had turned in--but not to sleep. Handy, who was
an experienced sailor, remained on deck all night. He was never away
from his post. He was as good a sailor as he was bad as a financier.
This speaks volumes for his abilities as a mariner.

The night passed over without mishap, and shortly before sunrise the
wind gave evidence of going down. There was, however, a high sea
running, and though the little craft behaved nobly and was skillfully
handled, yet to men unaccustomed to go down to the sea in ships calmer
weather would have been acceptable. Daylight dawned at last. Later the
sun made his appearance, red and fiery, looking as if annoyed at the
capers old Boreas had been cutting up during the night. The wind went
down as the sun rose higher, and long before noon all was calm and
peaceful. The spirits of the company were restored. As the morning
passed jokes and merriment helped to dispel the unpleasant experiences
of the storm of the previous night. Handy's good humor was particularly
conspicuous, as he had a cheerful word for all. His spirits were as
buoyant as the craft that bore his troupers.

At breakfast--or after breakfast, rather--the momentous question rose as
to where the next stand should be made. The company had already tested
its ability as well as the forbearance of two audiences, and
financially, if not artistically, came out fairly well. It is only fair
to admit, however, not one individual member of the troupe made what is
designated as a personal success. There was now money in the treasury,
and plenty of confidence to go with it. The consensus of opinion,
however, appeared to be that "Uncle Tom's Cabin" was a little too risky
to repeat. It was admitted that _Eva_ was not what might be described as
a howling success. Moreover, the boxes that did duty for ice floes were
fortunately, or unfortunately, left behind on the golden sands of Long
Island. In addition to that, the artist who performed the dog act and
who as a barker in Coney Island might be considered clever in a way was
now as hoarse as a second-hand trombone from a third-rate pawnshop let
out for hire to a broken-down German band. An hundred and one
difficulties were interposed against the further presentation of the
well-worn old drama. It was finally decided that _Uncle Tom_ should be
relieved from duty, for the present at least, and the play and the
public given a rest.