CHAPTER II

ARABELLA AT SCHOOL


When recess time came Mollie had forgotten to ask Nina if her cousin
was to be a pupil, and it happened that neither of the others questioned
her.

They were in the midst of a game of hide-and-seek, when Mollie, who,
with Nina, was hiding behind a large rosebush, looked up just in time to
see the garden gate open.

"Look!" she whispered.

"Why, that's Arabella!" said Nina, "but why has she brought her Aunt
Matilda with her?"

"I guess she didn't," whispered Mollie, "it's likely her Aunt Matilda's
bringing _her_."

Nina stifled a laugh, and they saw the two go along the walk, and enter
the cottage.

Flossie, who had been "it," ran quite around the house, and the others
"ran in," Reginald loudly shouting, "All in, all in!"

Flossie returned, laughing gaily to think that they had all got in free.
Then they commenced to talk of the new pupil, and quite forgot their
game.

The schoolroom windows were open, and Aunt Matilda's shrill, piping
voice could be plainly heard, but the children were not near enough to
know what she was saying.

They saw her turn to go, and then, when she reached the door, she drew
something from her bag, and placed it in Arabella's hand.

"What _do_ you s'pose she's giving her?" whispered Nina.

"_Peppermints_!" said Mollie, but although she had whispered it, she
felt that Dorothy had heard it, and knew that both she and Nina had
been laughing at Arabella and her aunt. Mollie's cheeks flushed, and she
looked down at her shoes. She knew that Dorothy's sweet eyes were
looking at her, not angrily, but with a tender grieving.

Dorothy was full of fun, and ready for merriment at any time, but she
saw nothing amusing in laughing at a playmate, or friend, and she had
asked them all to be kind to Arabella.

Aunt Charlotte turned to the window, and set the little silver bell
tinkling, and the pupils at once filed into the schoolroom.

They found Arabella Corryville sitting primly in her place. Her small,
thin hands were clasped upon her desk, and she looked at the pupils as
they filed in, peeping first over her glasses, and then through them, as
if she were hunting for little faults which she really hoped to find.

Aunt Charlotte had told her that on this, her first day of school, she
might listen to the recitations, and on the next day come with her
lessons prepared, and then recite with the class.

She sat very still, only moving her round eyes to watch the pupils, and
as she did not smile, one could not guess if she were pleased with the
school or not.

The little girls busied themselves with their books, but Reginald kept
his blue eyes fixed upon Arabella, as if he could think of nothing else.

At first she seemed not to notice him, but after a time she moved
restlessly on her seat, and wriggled about in a way that delighted the
small boy.

Arabella was not used to being stared at. She always stared boldly at
other people, but here was some one who looked at her without so much as
blinking. She glanced at the clock, and then, as if just remembering
something, took a small bottle from her pocket, shook some pills into
her hand, swallowed them, and turned to see if Reginald were looking. He
was, and Arabella was provoked.

"What you staring at?" she whispered rudely.

"You!" he whispered, not a bit abashed.

"Well, you just _needn't_," said Arabella.

"I know _I needn't_," replied the small boy, "but I like to."

"Why?" she asked.

"'Cause you're funny," Reginald said. It was not strange that Arabella
was angry. Would any girl be pleased to have a small boy watching her,
and declaring that she was "funny?"

And now Aunt Charlotte was calling the youngest class in reading, and
Reginald hastily snatched his book, and began to hunt for the lesson.

"The third page, Reginald," said Aunt Charlotte; "you may read the first
paragraph."

He found the place, and read the lines without a mistake. It was his
first term at school, but his mother had found pleasure in teaching him,
and he read quite as well as some of the younger pupils.

"Read the next paragraph, Reginald," said Aunt Charlotte.

"'When the king rode over the highway, the sun glistened upon his,--on
his,--'"

It was a word which Reginald had never seen, and he frowned until an
odd little pucker appeared on his forehead.

"'When the king rode over the highway, the sun glistened upon
his,'"--again he paused. The word looked no easier this time than when
he had first read the lines.

"I _can't_ pronounce that word," he said.

"Read the lines again, and when you come to the word that puzzles you,
pronounce it as you think it should be," said Aunt Charlotte.

The other pupils were interested, but when Reginald glanced toward
Arabella, he saw that she was smiling in evident delight at his
discomfiture. He resolved to rush through the reading in a way that
would tell her that he could read _anything_. He drew a long breath, and
then, as fast as possible, he read:

"'When the king rode over the highway, the sun glistened upon his
_carrot_ wheels!'"

Even Aunt Charlotte smiled at the droll error, but Arabella laughed long
and loud.

"Order, order!" said Aunt Charlotte.

"The word is _chariot_," she said.

The others read in turn, until they had finished the charming story, and
each of the girls wondered why Arabella was not reproved for rudeness.
The arithmetic lesson completed the morning's work, and as they walked
home, they talked of the new pupil.

"I don't see why Aunt Charlotte didn't speak to Arabella," said Nina
Earl, "she was horridly rude."

"And how queer she is," said Mollie Merton; "just the minute school was
out she ran down the path, and across the street to get home before any
of us could talk with her. And I _do_ wonder Aunt Charlotte didn't speak
to her about laughing so loudly, just because Reginald made a mistake.
I don't believe she could read any better."

"I guess _perhaps_ Arabella didn't mean to be disagreeable," said
Flossie Barnet.

She disliked Arabella, but she never could bear to hear any one spoken
of unkindly.

"Now, Flossie Barnet, you might just know that Arabella _likes_ to be
unpleasant," said Jeanette, and Flossie could not deny it.

Dorothy and Nancy had heard what they were saying, and they thought that
it was not at all nice of the girls to speak as if Aunt Charlotte had
allowed Arabella to be rude.

"Perhaps Aunt Charlotte thought she wouldn't correct her the very first
day," Nancy said, and Nina and Mollie wished that what they had said
had not been heard.

Little Reginald seemed, for once, to have nothing to say.

He was skipping along between his cousin Katie Dean and Jeanette Earl,
and tightly grasping their hands.

There had been a light shower early in the morning, and here and there a
little puddle reflected the blue sky and floating clouds. Reginald saw
one just ahead, and laughed softly. Katie and Jeanette were talking with
Dorothy, and paying little heed to the small boy who walked between
them.

"I thought your cousin was coming to school this morning," said Dorothy.

"She's coming the first of next week," said Jeanette.

"And what is her name?" asked Katie.

They were close to a fine large puddle now, and Reginald with a hop
landed both feet in the middle of it.

"Why, Reginald Merton Dean! You naughty boy!" said Katie; "just _look_
at my new shoes! See the dirty water you've splashed on Jeanette's
dress!"

"And look at the puddle," exclaimed Reginald, "I didn't spoil the
puddle; it looks just same's it did before I jumped in it."

Katie forgot that her question had not been answered, but Jeanette
remembered it.

"You asked what my cousin's name is," said Jeanette; "her name is Lola
Blessington."

"Is she a peacemaker?" asked Reginald, who still remembered the
morning's verse. "Well,--no, I mean not _exactly_," said Nina, who
hastened to reply before Jeanette could do so.

"What's she like?" asked Reginald.

"Oh, you'll know when you see her," said Jeanette.

"And we shall see her next week," Katie said.

The sunny days slipped by, and nothing unusual happened at the little
school.

In that first week the other pupils learned that there was but one way
to get on peaceably with Arabella.

At first they followed Dorothy's example, and urged Arabella to join
them in their games, but games which they chose never pleased her, and
when Friday came, Reginald spoke his mind. They were walking home from
school, and Arabella, as usual, had turned from her playmates,
preferring to go home alone.

Reginald looked after her frowning.

"She's just an old _fussbudget_!" he said.

"Oh, hush!" said Katie, "don't you know that we all promised Dorothy
we'd be kind to Arabella?"

"Well, I didn't say it _to_ her," said Reginald, "but I'd like to."

"Now, Reginald," said Katie, "you know mamma said that you were always
to be a gentleman, and that you must be 'specially polite and gentle if
you were to be in a class of girls."

"Well, what did I _do_?" he asked with wide open eyes. "I haven't
touched Arabella; if she'd been a boy I would have shaken her this
morning, when she sneered and called me a pretty boy. Boys aren't ever
pretty; only girls are pretty, and any boy would hate Arabella for
saying it."

They tried not to laugh, but the handsome little fellow was so angry,
and all because Arabella had called him pretty. Reginald, who never
could be angry long, joined in the general laugh which could not be
controlled.

Early Monday morning Dorothy and Nancy were skipping along the avenue on
their way to school.

Every day of the first week had been sunny, and here was Monday with the
bright blue sky overhead, and the little sunbeams dancing on the road.

"We had every lesson perfect last week," said Dorothy, "and I mean to
get 'perfect' this week, too."

"So do I," said Nancy, "and I can, if Arabella doesn't make me do half
her examples!"

"I don't think she ought to," Dorothy said.

"She doesn't _really_ ask me to," said Nancy, "but it's almost the same.
She says she can't do them, and says she could if some one was kind
enough to just show her how. Then I can't seem to be unkind, and the
minute I say I'll _help_ her, she pushes her slate and pencil towards
me. 'You can do 'em easier than I can,' she says, and instead of
_helping_ her, I do them all."

"Does Aunt Charlotte like to have you?" asked Dorothy.

"I don't know; I haven't told her about it yet. I don't want to be a
telltale," Nancy said.

"Of course you don't," agreed Dorothy, "but you know Aunt Charlotte says
that we are to be independent, and Arabella's anything but independent
when she doesn't do her examples herself. It's puzzling, though; mamma
says we mustn't notice her queer ways, and that we must be kind to her,
and it doesn't seem kind to refuse to help her with her lessons."

"Wait for us!" called a merry voice, and turning, they saw Nina and
Jeanette running toward them. A third girl clasped their hands, and
Dorothy knew that she must be their cousin, Lola Blessington.

She was very pretty, and she seemed so friendly that Dorothy was really
glad that she was to join the class, and Nancy was quite as pleased. It
was early for school, and Nina proposed that they sit on the wall, and
wait for Katie and Reginald.

They seated themselves upon the stone wall, and like a row of sparrows,
they chattered gaily.

Lola seemed full of fun, and she told of some fine games which she had
played at the school where she had been a pupil, and they were all very
glad that she was to be a member of the private class.

And now a thin little figure made its way across the street, just a
little way from where they were sitting.

Nina reached behind Lola, and touched her sister's sleeve; Jeanette
nodded, and looked toward the girl who walked along, looking down upon
the ground.

Dorothy saw her, and called to her kindly:

"Arabella! Arabella! Won't you come and meet our new playmate?"

Arabella turned, paused just a second to stare at the new pupil. Then
turning toward the stone cottage, she said:

"I can't stop to talk; I've got to go to school."

"Why, how--" Nancy would not finish the sentence.

She was grieved that Arabella should be so rude to Dorothy, and vexed
that their new friend should be unkindly treated.

"Who is she?" Lola asked.

"She's Arabella Corryville," said Nina, "and she's in our class, and I
wish--" she stopped as short as Nancy had a few moments before.

Lola turned to look at Nina.

"What were you going to say?" she whispered.

"I was going to say that I wished she wasn't."