CHAPTER V
THE NEXT STEP


Hench could not help admitting that the mention of the peculiar Welsh
word "Rhaiadr" in the newspaper had something to do with him.
Undoubtedly he was the person whom the unknown advertiser wished to
meet; but the whole matter was so strange and unexpected that he
determined to think it over carefully before taking any steps. For
this reason he said little to the excited Hungarian lady, who was
rather annoyed by his reticence. But he did not take any notice of her
hints, and retired as speedily as possible to his own room. There he
lighted his pipe, sat by the window and read the advertisement twice
and thrice again, after which he laid down the newspaper so that he
might think more freely. And his thoughts had to do with his past life
when travelling with his father.

The record of earlier days was bare enough, as Hench decided when he
recalled the same. His father had paid strangers to look after him
immediately after the death of Mrs. Hench, and when Owain was only
five years of age. For years the lad saw very little of his parent,
who was always moving from one place to another after the fashion of
the Wandering Jew. Then came his education at a private school, and
afterwards the wider training at Winchester. Later, Owain had expected
to go to Oxford, but his father, finding the need of some one to lean
upon in his old age, had summoned the boy to Berlin unexpectedly.
Owain's mysterious parent proved to be an aristocratic-looking
gentleman, perfectly dressed, perfectly acquainted with the motley
Continental world, and perfectly heartless. Hench senior frankly
acknowledged that he cared for no one but himself, and turned his son
into a kind of superior servant. The two travelled all over Europe in
moderately good style, as Mr. Hench always seemed to have enough to
keep him in comfort if not in luxury. But this last he also obtained
by gambling, as he frequently won large sums of money, which were
always squandered in extravagant whims and fancies. If Owain had not
possessed a sterling thoughtful nature he would have been ruined by
this hand-to-mouth existence, which was distinguished by continual ups
and downs. But the young man had his own views of leading a decent
life, and when unhampered by his spendthrift father determined to
carry them out. The opportunity did not come to him until he was
twenty years of age, when Mr. Hench died in Paris and was buried
without parade in Pere La Chaise. Cold-hearted and selfish to the end,
he passed away without suggesting how his son, to whom he had given no
profession, was to exist. He simply told him to go to Gilberry &
Gilberry, solicitors, of Lincoln's Inn Fields, on his twenty-fifth
birthday, when certain papers would be handed to him. Thus it can be
seen that the young man had little reason to regret the demise of so
egotistic a parent, who had been a curse rather than a blessing.

What the papers in charge of Gilberry & Gilberry might contain, Owain
could not guess, nor had his dying father enlightened him, but he
fancied that they might have something to do with proving the identity
of the dead man. Owain had always suspected, from the strict silence
preserved by his father about his past, that Hench was an assumed
name, and hoped that the mysterious documents might afford some clue
to the family history. The sole clue which the young man had to guide
him to knowledge of any sort or description was the mention of his
father of Rhaiadr as the place where he had passed his youthful days.
Yet the word had proved to be of some value, for its mention had
evoked a memory of Madame Alpenny's early romance, although that story
had proved to be more interesting than useful. Now it appeared that
the talismanic word was being used to lure him to meet a stranger,
who--as the advertisement put it--would tell him of something greatly
to his advantage.

Owain, having reached this point of his meditations, rose to pace the
room and consider the position. He was of two minds about answering
the summons, since an open-air meeting seemed scarcely business-like
or even reasonable. Also it was now the last week in June, and the
appointment was arranged for the first day of July. But on the tenth
day of that month came Owain's birthday, when he would be placed in
possession of the papers for which he had waited so long. The young
man considered, prudently enough, that it would be just as well to
curb his curiosity for nine days, as the documents might throw some
light on the admittedly odd advertisement. If he obeyed the summons to
the Gipsy Stile, Cookley, Essex, on the first of July, he would be at
the disadvantage of being in the dark, since he would know nothing,
while the person who met him would know much. The rough-and-tumble
life which he had led since the death of his father inclined Owain to
prudence, as he knew from dire experience what tricky people there
were in the world. Therefore he determined to take no notice of the
advertisement--at all events for the present, since he had a week to
think over the matter--and calmly wait until he became possessed of
the papers on his twenty-fifth birthday. Finally, he resolved to say
nothing to Spruce, who, luckily, had not yet returned, and to ask
Madame Alpenny to keep the Nut in ignorance of the advertisement. He
certainly would have to be more or less frank with the Hungarian lady,
since she had drawn his attention to the notice in _The Express_.

Madame Alpenny was full of curiosity when she met Hench at afternoon
tea, and, as they had the room to themselves, she immediately
proceeded to ask questions. Hench baffled her as well as he could, but
found it difficult to do so. She appeared to be certain that he was
more of a mystery than ever, and insisted upon scenting a fortune in
the same. Naturally, as Zara's mother, she was anxious to know if her
belief was correct, as then Hench could make the girl his wife and
supply a meritorious mother-in-law with ample funds. As usual, she
wore her eternal orange-spotted dress, her shabby bead mantle and her
flamboyant picture hat, looking quite a merry old blackguard of an
adventuress. Hench had long since decided that she was such a one.

"Of course you'll keep this appointment," said Madame Alpenny eagerly,
when she handed Hench his tea.

"I'm not sure. You see, I may not be the person wanted."

"Pfui!" said the woman contemptuously, and her large, dark eyes
sparkled. "Why, the word Rhaiadr proves conclusively that you are the
person. It is strange, Mr. Hench," she continued with great vivacity,
"that I should have heard the word from you only a few days before
this advertisement appeared."

"It's very strange," assented the young man, with his eyes searching
her face. "You know nothing about the advertisement, I suppose?"

"Eh, but why should I?" she asked in amazement. "Only by chance did I
see the name Rhaiadr, and immediately brought the paper to you,
remembering our conversation of some days back. I presume, sir," she
went on, with a shrug, "that you do not think I put in the
advertisement?"

"Oh, no; by no means," said Owain hastily; "but you might have
mentioned the Welsh name to some one else."

"No," said Madame Alpenny decidedly. "That is, I mentioned it only to
Zara, and she took little notice of what I mentioned. Of course, there
was Mr. Spruce, who was in this room when we talked about my meeting
with your father. But he is not likely to have asked you to meet him
in Essex, when he can see you here any day; also he probably has not
seen the advertisement."

"Oh, I don't suspect Spruce, Madame; and that reminds me, it will be
as well to say nothing to Spruce about the matter."

"Am I a chatter-box, or a fool?" asked Madame fiercely, and with a
lowering look on her face. "Certainly I will say nothing to Mr.
Spruce. But you must tell me all that takes place when you meet
whosoever you are to meet."

"I am going to meet no one," retorted Hench resolutely; "there is no
need for me to do so."

"But, my friend, you will hear of something greatly to your advantage,
as it said in the newspaper," expostulated the woman, frowning.

"I mean to wait until I get the papers from my lawyers on the tenth of
July, Madame. They may tell me of the something greatly to my
advantage without my going on a wild-goose chase into Essex."

"But I don't understand your objection."

"It is this. If I go now, I am quite in ignorance of my family history
with which this appointment has to do, as I shrewdly suspect. If I go
after the tenth of July I will be in a better position to deal with
the matter, as I think the papers at my lawyers' will tell me much
about my father."

Madame Alpenny nodded. "There is something in that. All the same, this
advertisement concerns you and not your father, who is dead and
buried."

"It and the papers also concern my father's past life, and therefore
concern my present," argued Hench seriously. "And I have waited so
long for light to be thrown on the past that I can easily wait a few
days longer."

"You have made no attempt to get at the past up till now?"

"Oh, yes. After my father's death I went to my lawyers"--Hench did not
intend to tell Madame Alpenny the name of the firm--"and asked about
the papers. They admitted that they had them, and promised to deliver
them on my twenty-fifth birthday. Otherwise they would say nothing."

"And you--what did you do?"

"What could I do save go away and do my best to keep myself alive for
five years. I went as a sailor on a tramp vessel and met with many
adventures. I found that I had a talent for writing, and in San
Francisco I managed to get a short story of mine accepted, printed and
paid for. Then I went to Peru, and afterwards to the South Seas,
coming back to England through Australia, China, India and Persia.
Rather a roundabout way of progression, I admit. But I was like a leaf
blown by the winds of fortune--and bitter winds they were. In one way
and another, chiefly by writing short adventure tales, I managed to
keep myself afloat. This year I came here, six months ago, to wait for
the tenth of July. Here I met you----"

"And Zara," said Madame quickly.

Hench looked at her with a peculiar expression, and raked his brown
beard with outspread fingers. It was on the tip of his tongue to
relate how he had been refused by the girl, but on second thoughts he
refrained. According to Zara her mother had a quick temper, and if all
was told the girl might suffer from that temper. Also Madame Alpenny,
being given a clue, might learn that Zara and Bracken were engaged,
which knowledge would assuredly lead to trouble. On the whole,
therefore, Hench decided to be silent, and replied evasively. "Ah,
yes, I met your charming daughter, of course."

"And admired her?" persisted Madame, not finding his speech
sufficiently ardent in tone.

"And admired her to the extent of asking your permission to propose to
her. But, of course, when you refused me that, because I am poor, I
have changed my mind. As a gentleman I can do no less."

"As a lover you can do much more," retorted the old woman, with a look
of annoyance. "And remember that I was favourable to your proposal
when I learned that you were the son of the man who wished to marry me
so long ago."

"Yet I am still poor," said Hench ironically.

"That has yet to be proved," rejoined Madame bluntly. "Oh, don't look
so astonished, my friend. I am old and I am shrewd, and I have learned
by experience that two and two make four. Those papers you mention,
together with this advertisement which plainly refers to you, appear
to me proof that you will inherit money."

"I don't see that, Madame, unless, of course, my father gave you some
hint that there was money in the family."

"Mr. Hench gave me no hint," said the lady sharply and hastily. "He
explained that he had a small income, and frequently won large sums at
cards. On the whole, he gave me to understand that if I married him
there would be no lack of money. But he never said a word about a
fortune coming to him."

"Then why should you think that a fortune is likely to come to me?"
asked Hench very naturally.

"I have intuition, my friend, and intuition tells me that those papers
and that advertisement mean money." Madame Alpenny paused, and then
continued after some thought: "You say that you had great difficulty
in getting money after your father's death?"

"That is so. I had to earn every penny."

"Strange, when he had a sufficient income to keep him comfortable."

"That was an annuity. He told me so shortly before he died."

"And told you that the papers with your lawyers would place you in
possession of money?"

"No." Hench shook his head. "He never even hinted at such a thing."

Madame Alpenny nursed her pointed chin and frowned at the carpet. "I
am sure there is money," she mused, loud enough for the young man to
overhear. "Your father gave you no profession or trade with which to
earn money, and it is not likely that he would have behaved so unless
he knew that the future held a fortune in store for you."

Hench's lip curled. "I am sorry to destroy any illusion about my
father," he said with a shrug; "but I don't think he cared two straws
about my future."

"Then why should he tell you about the papers?" asked Madame, as sharp
as a needle. "Believe me, those papers refer to a fortune."

"Well"--Hench rose and stretched himself--"I shall know all about that
when I see the lawyers on the tenth of July."

"Or when you meet this unknown person in Essex on the first of July."

"I am not going to meet the person," said Hench coldly; "and I have
given my reasons for not meeting him."

"Him!" Madame Alpenny laughed. "It may be a woman, for all you know."

Hench wheeled round to face her searchingly. "Why do you think it is a
woman?"

"Oh," she answered smoothly, "I only surmise. I don't say that the
person is a woman, for I know no more about the matter than you do.
All I do say is, that if you wish to marry my daughter you will have
to learn about this fortune as quickly as possible. I hope that I have
managed to get an engagement for Zara in the West End, and there she
may meet with some one wealthy who will make her his wife."

"You don't appear to take Mademoiselle Zara's feelings into
consideration."

"Feelings!" echoed Madame Alpenny vehemently. "What are feelings of
any sort compared with poverty? I have little money myself, and what I
have is all in these things." She touched her rings, bracelets and
brooches. "Zara does not earn what her talents demand. We want money,
and the sole way in which we can get it is for her to marry money.
Failing you there are others."

"Quite so," said Hench, thinking of Bracken, and smiling slightly.
"But a man who has no wealth may wish to marry her."

"Referring to yourself, I suppose," said Madame Alpenny dryly, and
quite mistaking his meaning. "Well, you won't marry her unless you
prove through those papers and that advertisement to be possessed of a
fortune. Until then, I hope you will be circumspect with regard to
Zara. Don't be too attentive to her, and turn the poor child's head."

"There is no fear of my doing that," said Hench equally dryly, "but to
make things safe I propose to remove myself from temptation. To-morrow
I shall leave this place."

"For how long?"

"For ever."

"Oh,"--Madame Alpenny looked as black as thunder, as this proposal by
no means suited her scheme of getting a rich son-in-law,--"don't do
that."

"Why not? After all, there is nothing to keep me here."

"Zara!"

"But you will not let me pay attention to Zara with a view to
matrimony." Madame Alpenny looked uneasy and puzzled. "You place me on
the horns of a dilemma, Mr. Hench. I can't let you become engaged to
my daughter until I am sure you have money. But of course"--she
brightened up--"if what I suspect is true, and money comes, you can
return and marry her."

This frank suggestion placed Hench on the horns of a dilemma, but he
managed to evade binding himself in a most dexterous way. "If
Mademoiselle Zara is really able to return my love, and thinks that
she will be happy as my wife, I shall certainly return and renew my
suit. But remember, Madame, she must become my wife of her own free
will, and not because you insist."

"Oh, that's all right," said the old lady easily. "Zara is a good girl
and will obey her mother to whom she owes so much."

"That is the very thing I don't wish her to do," insisted Hench,
sharply; "it is no question of filial obedience. If she accepts me of
her own free will, and without coercion from you, I marry her;
otherwise I will not."

"I am not in the habit of coercing my daughter," said Madame Alpenny
loftily, and, as usual, evading the main point; "and I shall expect
you to return with all information about your family. Then we can
talk. I look upon you as a man of honour, Mr. Hench, so much so that I
do not even ask you to give me any address. If you get money you will
marry Zara."

"And if I do not?"

Madame Alpenny shrugged her fat shoulders. "In that case she will
marry another person who has money."

"You are very business-like," said Hench, highly disapproving of this
mercantile way of looking at things.

"I always am," she assured him coolly; "it saves trouble!"

Owain said no more at the moment, nor did he have any conversation on
the subject again with the Hungarian lady prior to his departure.
Madame Alpenny evidently had full confidence in his love for her
daughter, and believed that Zara's beauty would lure him back again
with gold in his pockets. Had she had any idea of the interview
between the two young people, and the new relationship of brother and
sister which that interview had suggested, she might have been less
easy in her scheming mind. But Hench held his tongue and so did Zara,
therefore Madame Alpenny was kept in a kind of fool's paradise. The
young man reported the conversation hurriedly to the girl, and being
clever, she knew exactly how to act so as to keep her mother in
ignorance, until such time as she could declare her own mind and
choose her own mate.

Meanwhile; Hench got to work expeditiously and packed his
scanty luggage, after paying Mrs. Tesk what he owed her. The
ex-school-mistress was very sorry to lose him, not only from a
financial point of view but because she really had a regard for him.
Still, as she intimated, they were both leaves floating on the river
of life, and the currents of circumstances were parting them. She
hoped that he would enjoy himself and prosper wherever he was going,
but if Fortune proved unkind, he was to remember that a refined abode
always waited for him as a haven in adversity. All this and much more
said Mrs. Tesk, who had a warm heart and hospitable nature. Hench was
quite sorry to leave her, as he liked the quaint old lady and her odd
ways. And just when Owain finished his business in her sanctum he
emerged to run against Spruce, who looked more like a fashion-plate
and less like a man than ever.

"Just got back," said the Nut airily; "had a topping time. Wish you
had been with me, instead of wasting your sweetness on the desert air
hereabouts."

"I was not going to waste it any longer," said Hench dryly. "I am
leaving this house this afternoon."

"Oh, I say,"--Spruce looked disappointed and uneasy,--"for how long?"

"For ever! There is nothing to keep me here that I know of, and as I
told you long ago, I am more or less of a bird of passage."

"What about Mademoiselle Zara?"

"Oh, that's all right; and may I remind you it's none of your
business?"

"Well, don't get in a wax," protested Spruce amiably. "I never saw
such a chap for jumping on a fellow."

"If you think so, you must be glad that I am going away."

"No, I'm not," confessed the Nut frankly. "You're a gentleman and so
am I, and in this hole you're the only chap I can chum up with."

"We have not chummed up, as you put it," said Hench frigidly. "Well,
that isn't my fault. I am always willing to be friendly, and if you
won't be it's your loss, not mine. Where are you going?"

"That, again, is my business. I may be going abroad, or I may stay in
London, or I may be going to the moon."

"You're crazy enough for that last, anyhow, if lunatics live there as
some one said," fumed Spruce, who was growing angry. "And you're silly
to make an enemy of me, you know."

"I don't want you as a friend, and I don't care if you are my enemy
five times over," said Hench very straightly. "What the deuce do you
mean by that threat? What harm can you do me?"

"I never said that I could or would do you any harm," protested
Spruce, feeling uncomfortable; "but some day I may be able to do you a
good turn."

Hench looked at the spic and span little man, and felt rather sorry
for him, as he seemed to mean well, in spite of his irritating
curiosity. "Let us part friends," he said, holding out his hand.
"After all, you are an old schoolfellow and have got your good points.
But oil and water don't mix. See?"

Spruce gave the extended hand a feeble shake and dropped it. "I can't
help seeing, when you put things so straightly. It's a difference of
temperament, I suppose--you're clay and I'm china. But I tell you
what," cried Spruce, with his pale blue eyes flashing maliciously,
"you'll be glad enough some day for me to come and help you!"

"I always make a point of seeking no one's assistance," said Hench
coldly, and walked up to his room, wondering what Spruce meant, since
there was a significance in his tone which intimated that he quite
expected to meet his enemy again.

Spruce looked after the tall, straight form of the young man, and bit
his nether lip with anything but an amiable look. He greatly regretted
that Hench should go away thus suddenly, as the unexpected departure
upset his plans for making money out of him. He still clung to the
idea that the mysterious papers at the lawyers' had something to do
with a fortune, and determined not to lose sight of Hench, come what
may. Therefore he also retired to his own room to plot and plan and
devise schemes whereby he could entangle his prey in invisible nets.
But this he could not do without the aid of Madame Alpenny, since she
was the mother of Zara, whom Hench loved. So to Madame Alpenny the Nut
went and had quite a long conversation with her, which conversation
resulted in his quitting the house at the hour of Hench's departure.
Owain was relieved when the time came for him to go to find that
Spruce was not at his elbow with his disagreeable civilities. He never
could bring himself to like Spruce.

It was Bottles who helped the taxi-cab driver to carry down the trunk
and portmanteau which formed his hero's luggage. The boy had returned
on the morning of the day when Hench departed and was desperately
sorry to hear of the exit. Hench gave him a sovereign and comforted
him with a promise that on some future occasion they would meet again.
Then Bottles proffered a request that Hench would give him some
address to write to, and strange to say, the young man supplied him
with the information he asked for. He felt that he could wholly trust
Bottles.

"But you won't have anything to write to me about," he said, when the
written address was handed over.

Bottles looked up with a shrewd smile on his freckled face. "The mouse
helped the lion, sir, as mother told me, and I may help you."

"What do you mean by that? How can you help me?"

"Least said is soonest mended, as mother says," retorted Bottles
wisely. "And it ain't for nothing as I've read detective stories. I
won't give any one the address, sir. I'm yours till death!" and he
folded his arms with a noble air.

Hench drove away rather bewildered. "The boy is mad," he said. But the
boy was not.