CHAPTER XIII
DANGER


Considering that he had gained his heart's desire, Hench should have
returned to his lodgings in the highest spirits. Instead of doing so,
he arrived in a rather disturbed frame of mind. It seemed to him,
after due reflection, that he was not treating Gwen straightforwardly,
since as yet she was quite unaware of the relationship between them.
Nevertheless, as he argued, he would never have been able to win her
had she known at the outset that he was the heir to the estate and her
cousin. So far he had acted honestly enough in masquerading as a
disguised prince, but he should not have compelled her to acknowledge
her love before making himself known. Aware of the truth, she could
make her choice of marrying the man she loved, or of dismissing the
cousin whom her father had taught her to detest. Hench felt decidedly
uncomfortable.

This being the case, he was unable to stay in the poky little rooms,
as he felt too restless to sit down, and too excited to read. His foot
was now so much better that he could walk with considerable ease,
although he had some sort of twinge every now and then. But it was
certainly not well enough to permit his taking a long walk. Yet Owain,
feeling hipped, did so, and strolled a long way into the country. The
result was that he felt the old pain coming on again, and his ankle
being yet somewhat weak, there was danger that he might twist it.
Luckily, a carrier's cart came along the road when he was some miles
from Cookley, and the offer of a shilling procured Hench a drive back
to the village. When he alighted at Mrs. Bell's door he felt that his
foot was again swollen and painful, and cursed his folly, as he
hobbled into his sitting-room. He would have to rest that evening, as
he fully recognized, and as the lover's desire was to see Gwen, such
enforced absence from her presence did not please him. With a groan he
wondered how he would get through the dull hours until bed-time.

But Fate had already provided him with an interesting companion. While
Hench sat down and removed his boots and stroked his ankle, a tall
figure appeared at the door of the bedroom, which opened into the
sitting-room. After an astonished pause, Hench fell back on the sofa
and gasped.

"Jim!" he cried. "Who would have thought of seeing you here?"

"I thought I would surprise you," said Vane complacently, and
advancing into the parlour. "I arrived three hours ago and found that
you had gone out for a walk. Therefore, I looked up my aunt, as I
intend to put up with her for the night, and then came back to lie on
your bed and pass the time in sleep until you turned up. Humph! You
don't look like a joyful lover."

"What do you know about that?" asked Hench tartly. "Has Gwen----"

"No, she hasn't," interrupted Vane promptly. "But Aunt Emma hinted
that she wished to bring about a marriage between you and your cousin,
so that the family quarrels should end. From your words rather than
your looks, it seems that you have settled the matter and accomplished
Aunt Emma's desire."

Hench groaned. "We can talk of that later. Meantime, I apologize for
lying on the sofa; but I foolishly went for a long walk and my ankle
is aching again."

"Oh, that's all right," replied the barrister, lighting a cigarette.
"Aunt Emma told me of your rescuing Miss Evans and that your ankle was
better. Why the deuce have you made it worse?"

"I couldn't sit down here after meeting Gwen this morning, and went
for a walk. This is the result," and Hench pointed to his ankle. As he
had removed his sock, Vane saw that it was much inflamed.

"Silly ass," said Jim, fumbling near the fireplace for the bell-rope.
"Better bathe it in cold water and lie up for the evening."

"I intend to, and I daresay it will be all right in the morning.
Mrs. Bell"--the delicate-looking landlady entered as he spoke her
name--"just bring me a basin of cold water and my sponge."

Mrs. Bell threw up her hands at the sight which met her eyes. "Won't I
send for the doctor, Mr. Hench?"

"No. Bathing will reduce the swelling and rest will put everything
else right, Mrs. Bell. Don't worry. Sorry I'm an invalid, Vane, and
can't entertain you."

"Oh, I shan't let you off inviting me to dinner, Owain," said the
barrister, as Mrs. Bell disappeared to fetch the basin of water. "I've
come down to see you especially. Later I go on to sleep at my aunt's
place."

"What do you wish to see me about?" asked Hench uneasily.

"That can wait until I have some food. Don't be inhospitable."

Owain laughed and began to bathe his ankle in the cold water which
Mrs. Bell had just brought in. He thought that Vane's news could not
be anything very unpleasant since he so calmly postponed telling it.
So the two men chatted on various frivolous subjects while the
landlady laid the cloth and made the dinner ready. By the time Hench
finished doctoring his foot and was feeling less pain, the meal was
before them. Vane pushed the table near to the sofa so that Owain
could eat without sitting in a chair. He partook of the viands in the
dining attitude of an ancient Roman, leaning on one elbow, and being
hungry, managed to make an excellent meal. Then Mrs. Bell brought in
the coffee, and after clearing the table, left the two men to their
own devices. Vane sat near the window smoking, while Owain remained
comfortably on his sofa. The casement was open, and the scent of the
homely cottage flowers came into the room, which was filled with the
coming shadows of the night. Hench felt so tired that he did not begin
the conversation, and would have much preferred slumber. But Vane gave
him no chance. He began to chat immediately, and on a subject which
was already worrying his friend considerably.

"So you are in love with your cousin and she with you," he remarked,
after a puff or two. "I am going by what Aunt Emma said, remember. It
seems quick work to me--a kind of five minutes' wooing."

"Jim, I fell head over heels in love with Gwen the moment I saw her."

"The deuce! Yet the last time we met, you told me that you didn't know
what love meant."

"That was quite true. I didn't. My liking for Zara Alpenny was one of
simple admiration. But Gwen! Oh, Jim, you don't know how I adore her."

"I'll take it for granted that you do," said Vane dryly. "But I can't
say that your newly-born passion makes you very happy. You have
groaned two or three or four times since you arrived."

"It's my ankle giving me pain."

"Oh, shucks!" cried the barrister, after a purely American fashion,
"it's your heart, man. You aren't the chap to yowl over a twisted
sinew, as I know jolly well. Come along and unburden your mind to your
father-confessor."

"It will be a relief," admitted Hench, with a fifth groan. "The fact
is I am not quite sure if I have acted rightly in stealing a march on
Gwen."

"What do you mean by your stealing a march?"

"Well, you see she knows me as Hench, and hasn't the least idea that I
am her cousin who inherits the property."

"What of that? You came here with the idea of masquerading."

"So I did. But I didn't intend to go too far."

"And you have?"

"Yes!"--another groan. "We went to the Grange this morning, and when I
found myself alone in the garden with her I proposed to her."

"So she said to Aunt Emma."

"But, Jim, you told me that she had said nothing?"

"I did. It was a fib, I admit. But I wanted to hear your version of
the proposal, Owain," said Vane shamelessly. "You didn't intend to go
too far, nor did your cousin. But as you were swept off your feet by
passion, so was she, as she admitted to Aunt Emma, with tears. Miss
Evans intended to keep you at arm's length until she knew more about
you. But this passion took you both off your feet, so there's no doubt
of its being genuine on both sides."

"On my side, certainly. But on hers----?"

"The same. I hope you don't mind Aunt Emma telling me of what took
place; she has your interest very much at heart."

"I am glad that Mrs. Perage broke the ice," said Hench dolefully.
"It makes it easier for me to talk. You see, Gwen loves me as a
stranger----"

"Can a girl love a stranger?"

"I mean she thinks that I am only Owain Hench. When she learns that I
am Owain Evans she will throw me over."

"Why should she, seeing that she loves you?"

"Love may turn to hate, and her dislike for my father's son has been
carefully fostered by her father."

"Well," said Vane with an air of finality, "it seems to me that she
should be jolly glad to get back her old home by marriage with a
decent chap such as her cousin is."

"She doesn't believe that I am a decent chap," cried Hench irritably.

"Then you must prove that you are by explaining matters," insisted Jim
coolly. "Bless you, Miss Evans will look upon your masquerading as a
romance."

"I've got my doubts about that. She may resent being deceived."

Vane remained silent for a few moments and lighted a fresh cigarette.
"As a bachelor I don't pretend to understand women," he said at
length, "and it is just on the cards that she may cut up rough. Still,
if she loves you really and truly, as Aunt Emma assured me she does,
she will forgive your innocent deception. After all, by concealing the
truth you only gave yourself a fair chance of being judged on your
merits."

Hench nodded wearily. "That of course was my idea of masquerading, and
it was a right idea, seeing how strongly her father has prejudiced her
against me. I am a kind of monster in her eyes in my capacity of
heir"--Hench turned restlessly--"I must tell her, I suppose."

"You must, and as soon as possible," advised his mentor firmly. "If
you don't, the information may come from a less pleasant quarter."

"Now, what do you mean by that?" asked Hench, startled.

"Madame Alpenny----?"

"You don't know her."

"Oh yes, I do. I am not aware if Aunt Emma told you, but I went down
to Bethnal Green for a day or so."

"She told me last night, when I dined at her house. I was wondering
why you went there?"

"Where are your wits?" asked Vane in a surprised tone. "Of course, I
went in your interest to that boarding-house and stopped for a couple
of nights."

"In my interest?" Hench raised himself on his elbow and stared at Vane
with an uneasy look in his eyes.

"Of course. You don't suppose that any business of my own took me down
there, do you? So far as regards this murder of your uncle, you are
not out of the wood yet, so I wanted to learn what I could to help
you."

"You're a real good fellow, Jim," said Owain gratefully.

"Pfui! In the absence of briefs which don't come my way, it gives me
something to do. Besides, if there is a row over the business you can
engage me as your counsel, and then I'll make a big name straight
away."

"Oh, hang it"--Hench moved uneasily--"don't speak of that even in
jest."

"I'm not in jest, but in dead earnest," insisted Vane seriously. "I
tell you Madame Alpenny is on the warpath."

"What?"

"There! there! Don't get excited, you silly ass. Let me begin at the
beginning and end at the end." Vane blew a ring or so of smoke and
went on talking. "I stayed at The Home of the Muses to see if Spruce
knew anything about that advertisement, as I dreaded him rather than
the old woman. Of course, he knew me as a pal of yours at the old
school, and was very curious to know where you had got to."

"You didn't tell him, I hope?"

Vane shook his head. "Is thy servant an ass that he should do so? Of
course I lay low like Brer Rabbit, and let Spruce babble on. He
doesn't know anything about your real name, or the advertisement, or
your accession to fortune, or anything else. He'd have let the
information slip had he known. So far as Spruce is concerned you can
set your mind at rest. I'm glad such is the case, Owain, for he's a
dangerous monkey."

"Humph!" said Hench meditatively. "If he is ignorant why does he wish
to know where I am?"

"Because, having made London too hot for him over that card affair,
with which I charged him, by the way, he wants to seek fresh fields
and pastures new. He had an idea--I think you told him--that you were
going away into the lands at the back-of-beyond, so thought he'd like
to come with you."

"I wouldn't have him as a gift as a companion," said Hench with
disgust.

"So I told him, and he wasn't exactly pleased. At all events, since I
ostensibly didn't know where you were he shut up, and gave me the cold
shoulder on account of my nasty manner towards him with regard to the
cheating. I do think," finished Vane calmly, "that he's the most
abject Gadarene swine I have ever met."

Owain drew a long breath of relief when Vane finished, for he also
mistrusted the meddlesome little man. Had Spruce understood the
situation it was very certain that he would have attempted to make an
income out of the same by blackmail, particularly now that Hench had
money in large quantities. But as he was quite ignorant of everything
there was nothing to be feared. "Then it's not from that quarter the
information about my real name is to come to Gwen?"

"No! Set your mind at rest so far. Madame Alpenny is the lady likely
to queer your pitch."

"But she doesn't know where I am."

"Oh yes, she does. Mrs. Bell's cottage in Cookley, Essex, was the
address she gave me as one likely to find you."

Hench swore under his breath. "How did she find out?"

"Hurry no man's cattle, my son," said Vane sagely. "You must be
introduced to the subject gradually, so that you may admire my
diplomatic skill. I came to Mrs. Tesk's establishment to ask for you,
as that--according to my story--was the address you gave me. Mrs. Tesk
didn't know where you had gone to, so I paid civil attentions to
Madame Alpenny and confessed that I was your very good friend. Then
she told me--when we became better acquainted, mind you--that you were
her very good friend, and would shortly be her very good son-in-law."

"Nothing of the sort," cried Hench violently. "I proposed to Zara, and
she refused me as she loves Bracken."

"Zara said nothing about that proposal or her Bracken engagement to
Madame Alpenny, as she's a deuced sight too much afraid of the old
hag. Madame Alpenny told me that she had given you permission to marry
Zara whenever you got the cash. She mentioned that, as you were the
nephew of Squire Evans who had been murdered, you were now rich."

"How did she know that?" asked Hench, remembering the visit paid by
the Hungarian lady to his deceased uncle.

"Oh, she told me that your father, some twenty years ago, wished to
marry her, and gave a sketch of his family history."

"I know. It was the word 'Rhaiadr' he mentioned which revived her
recollection and led to the advertisement being inserted."

"The deuce!" said Vane curiously. "She told me nothing of that."

"No, she wouldn't," growled Hench impatiently. "Go on. I can speak
later."

"Well, then," proceeded the barrister, "Madame Alpenny knew that you
inherited the estate; also your real name and all the rest of it."

"My father told her."

"Exactly, and she frankly confessed that she had refused him because
the estate was going to you and not to your father. She never bothered
any more about the matter until she met you at The Home of the Muses.
Then the name 'Rhaiadr' revived her memory, and she wished you to
marry Zara when you became rich. After seeing the death of your uncle
in the newspapers she was certain that you had entered into your
kingdom, and is coming down to see if you will keep your promise and
marry Zara."

"Did she say that she could make it hot for me if I didn't?"

"No. She's a wary old bird. She was all smiles and amiability," said
Vane significantly. "There was no word of the murder or of the
advertisement, or anything which led me to understand that she had a
card up her sleeve. All she knows--according to her own showing--is
that you are Squire Evans' heir and are engaged to her daughter."

"It's a lie. I'm not. How did she learn where I was?"

"Oh, she confessed that as she had no reason--so she said--to conceal
it. A page called Bottles told her."

Hench slipped off the sofa and swore again. "I guessed as much. I saw
Bottles' brother, who is a page at your aunt's. He recognized me, as
his brother had written telling him all about me. I had half a mind to
tell him to hold his tongue as to my whereabouts but didn't like to."

"It would have been too late," said Vane quickly. "The page must
have written whenever he heard your name as that of a gentleman
staying in the village. At all events, Madame Alpenny knew all about
you being here the day before yesterday. Peter--I know the brat at my
aunt's--wrote to Simon, surnamed Bottles, and Bottles gave you away to
Madame Alpenny."

"Hang him! I did think that I could trust Bottles."

"You can't trust any one in this wicked world," commented the
barrister philosophically. "Madame Alpenny knew that the boy was a
hero-worshipper and adored you, so she made inquiries. I daresay a few
shillings made him talk."

"I don't believe it," said Hench doubtfully. "Peter hinted that
everything was right, so I believe Bottles has some card up his sleeve
which has to do with all this mystery."

"But I don't see----"

"No more do I," said Hench, cutting Vane short. "We're in the dark,
and until some light is thrown on the subject we will remain in the
dark. As to Madame Alpenny, she is at the bottom of the business, I am
sure." And then Owain went on to tell his friend about the visit paid
by the woman to the Squire. "She has engineered the whole plot, I'm
certain."

"Queer," admitted Vane, staring absently out into the shadowy garden.
"Do you think she murdered the Squire?"

"How do I know. She might have done so in order to place me in
possession of the money at once. There is certainly a motive.
Perhaps,"--Hench's face grew less gloomy,--"perhaps that is why she
hasn't moved in the matter so far."

"How did you expect her to move?"

"Well, she must have guessed that I would keep the appointment, and
when she saw that my uncle was murdered she naturally would accuse me.
Instead of doing this she has held her tongue."

"Only for a time, old son. Believe me, she may turn up here any day.
Naturally she wouldn't queer her pitch by telling the police of what
she knows. My impression is that she will try and make you marry Zara
by threatening to give you away unless you come up to the scratch."

"I shan't come up to the scratch, then," muttered Hench sullenly.

"In that case Madame Alpenny will have the game in her own hands."

"She won't, Jim, if I can prove her guilty."

"That won't be an easy job," said Vane doubtfully. "The woman is as
cunning as a fox, and as dangerous as a tigress. Besides, we can't be
sure that she _did_ get rid of your uncle. Anyhow,"--the barrister
rose to stretch himself,--"I advise you to make friends with Mammon by
telling Gwen who you are, and getting over the trouble before Madame
Alpenny turns up to put her fingers in the pie. She intends to do
that, you know."

"She'll burn her fingers, then."

"I said a pie, not a fire," retorted Jim dryly. "She intends to eat
your pudding, not to burn herself."

"Well, what is best to be done under the circumstances?" asked Hench
crossly.

"Tell Gwen who you are, and explain how you saw the body of her father
in Parley Wood," rejoined the barrister promptly.

"No! No! No! She would believe me to be guilty. You know how the
supposed tramp who went to the Bull Inn is suspected. If I confessed
that I was the man----"

"I see, I see," interrupted Vane, wrinkling his lean face. "It's a bit
difficult, isn't it, old man? But if Miss Evans loves you she'll never
believe a word against you. That's a woman all over."

"I tell you she is prejudiced against her cousin Owain," said Hench
sullenly. "And when she learns that I am that cousin she will merge
her love in hate."

Vane shook his head. "I doubt it. But if she does by any ill chance,
you have a friend in my aunt. She likes you no end, and will stand by
you. As you may guess, she has a strong influence over Miss Evans."

"Mrs. Perage is a very clever and sensible woman," mused Owain
thoughtfully. "And I really think it would be wise for me to tell her
everything."

"I agree!" cried Vane emphatically. "Bachelor as I am, I always
believe in asking a woman's advice. The sex has more intuition than
ours has. Let her be the person to deal with Madame Alpenny--one woman
against another. Then," added the barrister cynically, "you'll see the
fur fly."

"I won't tax Mrs. Perage's friendship so far, Jim. My ankle will be
all right to-morrow, so if you will ask Gwen to meet me near the old
Saxon Cross in the churchyard I can reveal who I am. When I settle
matters with her I shall see Mrs. Perage and relate the whole story."

"Relate it to Miss Evans also," advised Vane strongly.

"No. I shall only tell her who I am, and give her time to get over
that before I tell more. It's dangerous to give her too big a dose at
once. Also, when I tell your aunt about my adventure I wish to be
guided by her advice. She may suggest my keeping the same a secret
from Gwen until the truth becomes known."

"Well, do as you think best, Owain. But how is the truth to become
known?"

"I shall wait until I see Madame Alpenny before forming an opinion."

Vane wheeled round. "Do you mean to accuse her of the murder?"

"Not unless she accuses me. It's a case of pull devil, pull baker. Now
you'd better out along to your aunt's and make my excuses for not
turning up. Meanwhile I shall think over things, and a pleasant night
I shall have."

"The way of the transgressor is hard," laughed Vane cheerfully.

"Transgressor be hanged! I'm more sinned against than sinning."

Vane laid a friendly hand on his friend's shoulder. "All right, old
man, don't get your hair riz. I'll tell Aunt Emma that your ankle kept
you from paying your respects to her, and will request Miss Evans to
meet you to-morrow near the Cross. At what time, by the way?"

"Three o'clock in the afternoon. And don't come along in the morning,
Jim. I wish to think out matters alone. I shall see you in the
afternoon."

Vane put on his hat and prepared a cigarette. "Don't overdo it," he
advised at the door. "And remember that two heads are better than
one."

"Quite so. That is why I intend to see Gwen. All the same, I'm
afraid."

"Nonsense! Use that very eloquent tongue of yours and show her that
the devil is not so black as he is painted. Miss Evans, being very
much a woman, may cut up rough at the outset, but when----"

"When what?"

"When she knows that you are in danger of arrest she will stand by you
through thick and thin."

"I have my doubts," said Hench dolefully.

"I haven't. Women are contrary animals. As her prosperous cousin she
may hate you. As an innocent man, in danger of being hanged, she will
love you."

"May you be a true prophet," said Hench fervently, and Vane went away
laughing.