CHAPTER XXI.

THE ARREST.

    _Count._ If thou be he, then thou art prisoner.
    _Tal._ Prisoner to whom?

    SHAKESPEARE.


For several days after the visit of the Lady Guendolen and her lover
to the house of the verdurer of Kentmere, rumors, many of which had
been afloat since the catastrophe on the sands, began to increase
among the dalesmen, of strangers seen at intervals among the hills or
in the scattered hamlets, seeming to observe every thing, but
themselves carefully avoiding observation, asking many questions, but
answering none, and leaving a general impression on the minds of all
who saw them, that they were thus squandered, as it were, through the
lake country, as spies, probably of some marauding band, but certainly
with no good intent. These individuals bore no sort of resemblance, it
was said, or affinity one to the other, nor seemed to have any league
of community between them, yet there was an unanimous sentiment,
wherever they came and went, which they ordinarily did in succession,
that they were all acting on a common plan and with a common purpose,
however dissimilar might be their garb, their occupation, or their
immediate purpose. And widely dissimilar these were--for one of those
suspected was in appearance a maimed beggar, displaying the
scallop-shell of St. James of Compostella, in token that he had
crossed the seas for his soul's good, and vowing that he had lost his
left arm in a sanguinary conflict with the Saracens, who were
besieging Jerusalem, in the valley of Jehoshaphat; a second was a
dashing pedler, with gay wares for the village maidens, and costlier
fabrics--lawns from Cyprus, and silks and embroideries of Ind, for the
taste of nobler wearers; another seemed a mendicant friar, though of
what order it was not by any means so evident, since, his tonsure
excepted, his apparel gave token of very little else than raggedness
and filth.

Nearly a week had passed thus, when, at a late hour in the afternoon,
word was conveyed to the castle of Sir Yvo, under Hawkshead, by the
bailiff, in person, of the little town of Kendal, which lay about
midway between Kentmere and the bay, that a small body of horse,
completely armed, having at their head a gentleman apparently of rank,
had entered the town about mid-day, demanded quarters for the night
for man and horse, and sent out one or two unarmed riders, as if to
survey the country. In any part of England traversed by great roads,
this would have created no wonder or surmise; for hundreds of such
parties were to be seen on the great thoroughfares every day, few
persons at that period journeying without weapons of offense and arms
defensive, and gentlemen of rank being invariably attended by bodies
of armed retainers, which were indeed rendered indispensable by the
prevalence of private feuds and personal hostilities which were never
wholly at an end between the proud barons, whose conterminous lands
were constant cause of unneighborly bickerings and strife.

In these wild rural districts, however, it was quite different, where
the roads merely gave access and egress to the country lying below the
mountains, but opened no thoroughfare either for trade or travel,
there being no means of approach from that side, even to Penrith or
Carlisle, already towns of considerable magnitude, lying but a few
miles distant across the vast and gloomy fells and mountains, except
by the blindest of paths, known only to shepherds and outlaws, leading
through tremendous passes, such as that terrible defile of
Dunmailraise, famous to this day for its stern and savage grandeur.
Hence it came, that, unless it were visitors to some of the few
castles or priories in the lower valleys, such as Furness Abbey,
Calder Abbey, Lannercost Priory, Gleaston Castle, the stronghold of
the Flemings, Rydal, the splendid manor of the Ratcliffes, this
fortalice of De Taillebois, at Hawkshead, and some strong places of
the Dacres and Cliffords, yet farther to the east, not constituting in
the whole a dozen within a circumference of fifty miles, no strangers
were ever seen in these secluded valleys, without exciting wonder, and
something of consternation.

So it was in this instance; and so urgent did it appear to Sir Yvo,
that, although he was just sitting down to supper when his officer
arrived--for Kendal was his manorial town, where he held his courts,
leet and baron--that he put off the evening meal an hour, until he
should have heard his report, and examined into all the circumstances
of the case.

Then commending his bailiff for his discretion, he dismissed him, with
orders to make all speed home again, without signifying at Kendal
whither he had been, to give all heed and courteous attention to the
strangers, keeping ever a sharp eye on their actions, and to expect
himself in the burgh ere midnight.

This done, he returned to the hall, as calm as if nothing had occurred
to move him, though he was indeed doubly moved, both as lord of the
manor and sheriff of the country; and, merely whispering to Aradas to
have fifty lances in the saddle within an hour, and to dispatch a
messenger to have the horse-boats ready on the lake, opposite to
Bowness, took his place at the board-head, with his fair child on his
right, and the young esquire on the left, and carved the roe venison
and moor fowl, and jested joyously, and quaffed his modicum of the
pure light wines of Gascony, as if he had nothing on hand that night
beyond a walk on the battlements, before retiring. So soon, however,
as supper was over, he bade his page go up to his private apartment,
and bidding Aradas look sharp, for there was little time to lose, he
told Guendolen, with a smile, that he should make her chatelaine for
the night, since he must ride across the lake to Kendal.

"To-night, father!" she exclaimed, astonished, "why, it is twenty
miles; you will not be there before daybreak."

"Oh, yes, by midnight, girl, if we spur the sharper; and it is partly
on your business that I go, too, child; for I fancy there is something
afoot, that bodes no good to your friend Kenric; but we'll nip it in
the bud, we'll nip it in the bud, by St. Agatha!"

"Ah!" said the girl, turning pale, "there will be danger, then----"

"Danger!" said the old knight, looking at her sharply, "danger, not a
whit of it! It is but that villain d'Oilly, with a score of spears of
Sherwood. I must take fifty lances with me, for, as sheriff, I must
keep peace without spear-breaking; were it not for that, I would meet
him spear to spear; and he should reckon with me, too, for poor Sir
Philip, ere we parted, as he shall do yet, one day, although I see not
how to force him to it. So now, kiss me, silly minion, and to bed with
you while I go arm me."

And the stout old warrior strode up to his cabinet, whence he
descended in half an hour, armed _cap-a-pie_ in chain mail, plate
armor not having yet come into use, with his flat-topped casque on his
head, his heater-shaped shield hung about his neck, and his huge,
two-handed sword crossing his whole person, its cross-hilt appearing
above his left shoulder, and its tip clashing against the spur on his
right heel. As he entered the court of the castle, his men were all in
their saddles, sitting firm as pillars of steel, each with his long
lance secured by its sling and the socket attached to the stirrup,
bearing a tall waxen torch in his right hand, making their mail-coats
flash and twinkle in the clear light, as if they were compact of
diamonds. Aradas was alone dismounted, holding the stirrup for his
lord until he had mounted, when he sprang, all armed as he was, into
the saddle. The banner-man at once displayed the square banner of his
lord, the trumpeter made the old ramparts ring with the old gathering
blast of the house of De Taillebois, and, two and two, the glittering
men-at-arms, defiled through the castle gate, and wound down the steep
hill side, long to be traced from the battlements, now seen, now lost
among the woods and coppices, a line of sinuous light, creeping, like
a huge glow-worm, over the dark champaign.

Before they reached the lake shore, however, the moon rose, round and
red, from behind the Yorkshire fells; and, extinguishing their
flambeaux, they pricked rapidly forward through the country, which,
intricate as it was, soon became as light as at noonday.

On the other side of the lake, circumstances of a very different
nature, though arising from the same causes, were occurring. Early in
the afternoon, while Kenric was absent on his rounds, a single rider,
plainly clad, and unarmed, except his sword, made his appearance,
riding up the valley from the direction of Kendal, and soon pulling up
at the cottage, inquired the road to Rydal. Then, on being informed
that there was no pass through the hills in that direction, and that
he ought to have turned off to the eastward, through a gap five miles
below, he asked permission to dismount and rest himself and his horse
awhile, a favor which Edith readily conceded. Oat cakes and cheese,
then, as now, the peculiar dainties of the dalesmen, with home-brewed
mead, were set before him, his horse was fed, and every act of
hospitality which could be done to the most honored guest was extended
to him.

He observed every thing, noted every thing, especially the crossbow
which Eadwulf had brought with him on his late inopportune arrival,
learned the name and station of his entertainer, and how he was the
tenant of the Lord of Hawkshead, Yewdale, Coniston, and Kentmere, and
verdurer of the forest in which he dwelt; and then, offering money,
which was refused, mounted his horse, and rode back toward Kendal more
rapidly then he came.

So soon as Kenric returned from his rounds, he was informed of all
that had passed, when, simply observing, "Ha! it has come already, has
it? I scarce expected it so soon," he bade one of the boys get the
pony ready, and prepare himself to go round the lake to the castle,
and then sat down with his wife to the evening meal, which she had
prepared for him.

When they were alone, "Now, Edith, my dear," he said, "the time has
come for which we have been so long waiting. I know for certain that
Sir Foulke d'Oilly is in Kendal, and our good lord will know it
likewise before this time. Therefore there is no danger that will not
be prevented almost before it is begun. That I shall be taken, either
by violence or by legal arrest, this night, is certain--though I think
probably by violence, since no true caption may be made after sunset."

"Then, why not escape at once?" asked his fair wife, opening her great
blue eyes wider than their wont. "Why not go straight to the castle,
and place yourself in my lord's safeguard?"

"For two reasons, wife of mine, each in itself sufficient. First, this
is my post, and I must hold it, until removed or forced from it.
Second, my lord deems it best I should be taken now, and the matter
ended. But this applies not to you or my mother. The Normans must find
neither of you here; no woman, young or old, is safe where Foulke
d'Oilly's men are about. You must wrap the old woman as warm as you
may, and have her off on the pony to Ambleside as quickly as may be.
Ralph shall go with you. I am on thorns and nettles until you are
gone."

"I will never leave you, Kenric. It is useless to speak of it--never!"

"Oh! yes, you will, Edith," he answered, quietly. "Oh! yes, you will,
for half a dozen reasons; though one is enough, for that matter.
First, you will not see my mother dead through your obstinacy. Second,
you will not stay to be outraged yourself, before my very eyes,
without my having power to aid you----"

"Kenric!"

"It is mere truth, Edith. Thirdly, it is your duty to go; and last, it
is my will that you go, and I never knew you refuse that."

"Nor ever will, Kenric; though it break my heart to do it."

"Tush! tush! girl; hearts are tough things, and do not break so
easily; and when you kiss me to-morrow at the castle, you'll think of
this no more. See, here's the boy with the pony and the pillion. Now,
hurry, and coax my mother out, and get on your cloak and wimple,
that's a good lass. I would not have you here when Foulke d'Oilly's
riders come, no! not to be the Lord of Kentmere. Hurry! hurry!"

Many minutes had not passed, before, after a long embrace, and a flood
of tears on the part of Edith, the two women mounted on the sturdy
pony, the wife in the saddle, and the aged mother seated on a sort of
high-backed pillion--made like the seat of an arm-chair--and secured
by a broad belt to the waist of her daughter, took their way across
the wooded hills toward Ambleside, the boy Ralph leading the animal by
the head, and two brace of noble alans, his master's property, which
Kenric did not choose to expose to the cupidity of his expected
captors, gamboling in front, or following gravely at heel, according
to their various qualities of age and temper.

The son and husband gazed after them wistfully, so long as they
remained in sight; and when, as they crossed the last ridge of the low
intermediate hills which divide the narrow glen of the upper Kent from
the broader dale of Windermere, standing out in bold relief against
the strong light of the western sky, Edith waved her kerchief, he drew
his hard hand across his brow, turned into his desolate dwelling, and,
sitting down by the hearth, was soon lost in gloomy meditation.

Darkness soon fell over lake and meadow, mountain and upland. Hundreds
of stars were twinkling in the clear sky, to which a touch of frost,
not unusual at this early season among those hill regions, had lent an
uncommon brilliance, but the moon had not yet risen.

Kenric was now becoming restless and impatient, and, as is frequently
the case when we are awaiting even the most painful things, which we
know to be inevitable, he soon found himself wishing that the time
would come, that he might know the worst, and feeling that the
suspense was worse than almost any reality.

Several times he went to the door, and stood gazing down the valley,
over the brown woods and gray, glimmering waters, to look and listen,
if he might discover any signs of the coming danger. But his eyes
could penetrate but a little way into the darkness, and no sounds came
to his ears, but the deep sough of the west wind among the pine boughs
of the mountain top, the hoarse ripple of the brook brawling against
the boulders which lay scattered in its bed, and the hooting of the
brown owls, answering each other from every ivy-bush and holly-brake
on the wooded hill-sides.

Nothing could be more calm or peaceful than the scene, nothing less
indicative of man's presence, much more of his violence and angry
passions. Not even the baying of a solitary house-dog awoke the
echoes, though oftentimes the wild, yelping bark of the fox came sharp
from the moorland, and once the long-drawn howl of a wolf, that most
hideous and unmistakable of savage cries, wailed down the pass like
the voice of a spirit, ominous of evil.

The hunter's spirit was aroused in the watcher by the familiar sound.
He listened intently, but it was heard no more, and, shaking his head,
he muttered to himself, "He is up in the dark corrie under Norton
pike; I noted the wool and bones of lambs, and the spoil of hares
there, when I was last through it, but I laid the scathe to the foxes.
I knew not we had a wolf so nigh us. Well, if they trap not me
to-night, I'll see and trap that other thief to-morrow. And thinking
of that, since they come not, I trow there is no courtesy compels me
to sit up for them, and there's some thing in my head now that chimes
a later hour than vespers. I'll take a night-cap, and lay me down on
the settle. Gilbert, happy dog, has been asleep there on the hearth
these two hours;" and, suiting the action to the word, he drew a
mighty flagon of mead, quaffed it to the dregs, and, throwing a heavy
wooden bar across the door, wrapped his cloak about him, and, casting
himself on a settle in the chimney corner, was soon buried in deep
slumber.

When he woke again, which he did with a sudden start, the moon was
shining brightly through the latticed casements, and there were sounds
on the air which he easily recognized as the clash of mail coats and
the tramp of horses, coming up at a trot over the stony road. Looking
out from a loop beside the door, he perceived at once that the moment
he expected had arrived. Ten men, heavily armed, but wearing
dark-colored surcoats over their mail, and having their helmets cased
with felt, to prevent their being discovered by the glimmering of the
steel in the moonlight, had ridden up to the foot of the little knoll
on which the cottage stood, and were now concerting their future
movements.

While he gazed, nine of the men dismounted, linking their horses, and
leaving them in charge of the tenth. Four then filed off to keep
watch, and prevent escape from the rear, or either end of the
building; and then, at a given signal, the others marched up to the
door, and the leader struck heavily on the panel with the haft of a
heavy battle-ax, crying, "Open! on pain of death! open!"

"To whom? What seek you?" asked Kenric, whose hand was on the bar.

"To me, Foulke d'Oilly. I seek my fugitive villeyn, Eadwulf the Red.
We have traced him hither. Open, on your peril, or take the
consequence."

"The man is not here; natheless, I open," replied Kenric; and, with
the word, he threw open the door; and the men-at-arms rushed in,
brandishing their axes, as if they expected resistance. But the Saxon
stood firm, tranquil, and impassive, on his hearthstone, and gave no
pretext for violence.

"And who may you be, sirrah," cried the leader, checking the rudeness
of his vassals for the moment, "who brave us thus?"

"Far be it from me," said he, "to brave a nobleman. I am a free Saxon
man, Kenric, the son of Werewulf, tenant in fee to my Lord of
Taillebois, and his verdurer and forester for this his manor of
Kentmere."

"Thou liest," said one of the men-at-arms. "Thou art Eadwulf the Red,
born thrall of Sir Philip de Morville, on his manor of Waltheofstow,
and now of Sir Foulke d'Oilly, who has succeeded to the same."

"Thou liest!" replied Kenric, stoutly. "And I will prove it on thy
body, with permission of Sir Foulke d'Oilly, with quarterstaff or
gisarme, battle-ax or broadsword."

"Art sure this is he, Damian? Canst swear to the man? Is there any
other here, who knows the features of the fellow Eadwulf, to witness
them on oath? Light yonder cresset from the embers on the hearth;
advance it to his face! Now, can you swear to him?"

The torch was thrust so rudely and so closely into his face, that it
actually singed his beard; yet he started not, nor flinched a hair's
breadth.

"I can," said the man who had first spoken, stubbornly. "That is
Eadwulf the Red. I have seen him fifty times in the late Sir Philip's
lifetime; and last, the day before he fled and slew your bailiff of
Waltheofstow in the forest between Thurgoland and Bolterstone, in
September. I will swear to him, as I live by bread, and hope to see
Paradise."

"And I," exclaimed another of the men, after examining his features,
whether deceived by the real similitude between them and his brother,
which did amount to a strong family likeness, though the color of the
hair and the expression of the two men were wholly dissimilar, or only
desirous of gratifying his leader. "I know him as well as I do my own
brother. I will swear to him any where."

"You would both swear falsely," said Kenric, coolly. "Eadwulf is my
brother, son of Werewulf, son of Beowulf, once henchman to Waltheof,
of Waltheofstow, and a free Saxon man before the Conquest."

"I will swear to him, also," cried a third man, who had snatched down
the fatal crossbow and bolts from above the chimney. "Kenric and
Eadwulf are but two names for one man; and here is the proof. This
crossbow, with the name Kenric burned into the stock, is that which
Eadwulf carried on the day when he fled; and these quarrels tally,
point for point, with those which were found in the carcass of the
deer he slew, and in the body of the bailiff he murdered!"

"Ha! What say you to that, sirrah?"

"That it is my crossbow; that my name is Kenric, by-named the Dark;
that I am, as I said before, a free Saxon, and have dwelt here on
Kentmere since the last days of July; so that I could have slain
neither deer nor bailiff, between Thurgoland and Bolterstone, in
September. That is all I have to say, Sir Foulke."

"And that is nothing," he replied. "So thou must go along with us.
Wilt go peaceably, too, if thou art wise, and cravest no broken
bones."

"Have you a writ of _Neifty_[4] for me, Sir Foulke?" asked Kenric,
respectfully, having been instructed by Sir Yvo.

          [4] _De Nativo Habendo._--Howell's State Trials, 38,
          note.

"Tush! dog, what knowest thou of _Neifty_? No, sirrah, I seize
mine villeyn, of mine own right, with mine own hand. What sayst to
that?"

"That you must seize me, to seize justly, by the sheriff; and I deny
the villeynage, and claim trial."

"And I send you, and your denial, and your _Neifty_, to the fiend
who hatched them. You are my slave, my born slave; and in my dungeons
of Waltheofstow will I prove it to you. Hugo, Raoul, Damian, seize
him, handcuff his wrists behind him, drag him along if he resist."

"I resist not," said Kenric. "I yield to force, as I hold you all to
witness; you above all, Gilbert," addressing the boy who stood
staring, half-awake, while they were manacling his hands. "But I pray
you, Sir Foulke, to take notice that in this you do great wrong to my
good lord, Sir Yvo de Taillebois, both that he is the Lord of
Hawkshead, Coniston, and Yewdale, and of this manor of Kentmere on
which you now trespass, and that he is the sheriff of these counties
of Lancaster and Westmoreland, where you wrongfully seize
jurisdiction. And this I notify you, that he will seek the right at
your hands, and that speedily."

"Dog! Saxon! slave! dirt of the earth! do you dare threaten me?" cried
the fierce baron, purposely lashing himself into fury; and he strode
up to the helpless man, whose arms were secured behind his back, and
smote him in the mouth with his gauntleted-hand, that the blood gushed
from his lips, and streamed over all the front of his leathern
hunting-shirt.

"That, to teach thee manners. Now, then, bring him along, men; set him
on the black gelding, chain his legs fast under the brute's belly,
ride one of you at each side, and dash his brains out with your axes
if he look like escaping. Away! away! I would be at Kendal before they
ring the prime,[5] and at Lonsdale before matins.[6] So shall we be
well among the Yorkshire fells before daybreak."

          [5] Prime was the first service, and began the instant
          midnight had sounded.

          [6] Matins was the second service, at 3 A.M.

His words were obeyed without demur or delay, and within five minutes
the Saxon was chained on the back of a vicious, ill-conditioned brute,
with a savage ruffian on either side, glaring at him through the bars
of their visors, as if they desired no better than a chance to brain
him, in obedience with orders; and the whole party, their horses being
quite fresh, were thundering down the dale at a pace that would bring
them to Kendal long enough before midnight.