CHAPTER V. A PHANTOM OF DELIGHT

Shortly before sunset that evening Eric went for a walk. When he did not
go to the shore he liked to indulge in long tramps through the Lindsay
fields and woods, in the mellowness of "the sweet 'o the year." Most of
the Lindsay houses were built along the main road, which ran parallel to
the shore, or about the stores at "The Corner." The farms ran back from
them into solitudes of woods and pasture lands.

Eric struck southwest from the Williamson homestead, in a direction
he had not hitherto explored, and walked briskly along, enjoying the
witchery of the season all about him in earth and air and sky. He felt
it and loved it and yielded to it, as anyone of clean life and sane
pulses must do.

The spruce wood in which he presently found himself was smitten through
with arrows of ruby light from the setting sun. He went through it,
walking up a long, purple aisle where the wood-floor was brown and
elastic under his feet, and came out beyond it on a scene which
surprised him.

No house was in sight, but he found himself looking into an orchard; an
old orchard, evidently long neglected and forsaken. But an orchard dies
hard; and this one, which must have been a very delightful spot once,
was delightful still, none the less so for the air of gentle melancholy
which seemed to pervade it, the melancholy which invests all places that
have once been the scenes of joy and pleasure and young life, and are so
no longer, places where hearts have throbbed, and pulses thrilled, and
eyes brightened, and merry voices echoed. The ghosts of these things
seem to linger in their old haunts through many empty years.

The orchard was large and long, enclosed in a tumbledown old fence of
longers bleached to a silvery gray in the suns of many lost summers. At
regular intervals along the fence were tall, gnarled fir trees, and an
evening wind, sweeter than that which blew over the beds of spice from
Lebanon, was singing in their tops, an earth-old song with power to
carry the soul back to the dawn of time.

Eastward, a thick fir wood grew, beginning with tiny treelets just
feathering from the grass, and grading up therefrom to the tall veterans
of the mid-grove, unbrokenly and evenly, giving the effect of a solid,
sloping green wall, so beautifully compact that it looked as if it had
been clipped into its velvet surface by art.

Most of the orchard was grown over lushly with grass; but at the end
where Eric stood there was a square, treeless place which had evidently
once served as a homestead garden. Old paths were still visible,
bordered by stones and large pebbles. There were two clumps of lilac
trees; one blossoming in royal purple, the other in white. Between
them was a bed ablow with the starry spikes of June lilies. Their
penetrating, haunting fragrance distilled on the dewy air in every soft
puff of wind. Along the fence rosebushes grew, but it was as yet too
early in the season for roses.

Beyond was the orchard proper, three long rows of trees with green
avenues between, each tree standing in a wonderful blow of pink and
white.

The charm of the place took sudden possession of Eric as nothing had
ever done before. He was not given to romantic fancies; but the orchard
laid hold of him subtly and drew him to itself, and he was never to be
quite his own man again. He went into it over one of the broken panels
of fence, and so, unknowing, went forward to meet all that life held for
him.

He walked the length of the orchard's middle avenue between long,
sinuous boughs picked out with delicate, rose-hearted bloom. When he
reached its southern boundary he flung himself down in a grassy corner
of the fence where another lilac bush grew, with ferns and wild blue
violets at its roots. From where he now was he got a glimpse of a house
about a quarter of a mile away, its gray gable peering out from a dark
spruce wood. It seemed a dull, gloomy, remote place, and he did not know
who lived there.

He had a wide outlook to the west, over far hazy fields and misty blue
intervales. The sun had just set, and the whole world of green meadows
beyond swam in golden light. Across a long valley brimmed with shadow
were uplands of sunset, and great sky lakes of saffron and rose where
a soul might lose itself in colour. The air was very fragrant with the
baptism of the dew, and the odours of a bed of wild mint upon which he
had trampled. Robins were whistling, clear and sweet and sudden, in the
woods all about him.

"This is a veritable 'haunt of ancient peace,'" quoted Eric, looking
around with delighted eyes. "I could fall asleep here, dream dreams
and see visions. What a sky! Could anything be diviner than that fine
crystal eastern blue, and those frail white clouds that look like woven
lace? What a dizzying, intoxicating fragrance lilacs have! I wonder
if perfume could set a man drunk. Those apple trees now--why, what is
that?"

Eric started up and listened. Across the mellow stillness, mingled
with the croon of the wind in the trees and the flute-like calls of the
robins, came a strain of delicious music, so beautiful and fantastic
that Eric held his breath in astonishment and delight. Was he dreaming?
No, it was real music, the music of a violin played by some hand
inspired with the very spirit of harmony. He had never heard anything
like it; and, somehow, he felt quite sure that nothing exactly like it
ever had been heard before; he believed that that wonderful music was
coming straight from the soul of the unseen violinist, and translating
itself into those most airy and delicate and exquisite sounds for the
first time; the very soul of music, with all sense and earthliness
refined away.

It was an elusive, haunting melody, strangely suited to the time
and place; it had in it the sigh of the wind in the woods, the eerie
whispering of the grasses at dewfall, the white thoughts of the June
lilies, the rejoicing of the apple blossoms; all the soul of all the old
laughter and song and tears and gladness and sobs the orchard had
ever known in the lost years; and besides all this, there was in it a
pitiful, plaintive cry as of some imprisoned thing calling for freedom
and utterance.

At first Eric listened as a man spellbound, mutely and motionlessly,
lost in wonderment. Then a very natural curiosity overcame him. Who in
Lindsay could play a violin like that? And who was playing so here, in
this deserted old orchard, of all places in the world?

He rose and walked up the long white avenue, going as slowly and
silently as possible, for he did not wish to interrupt the player.
When he reached the open space of the garden he stopped short in new
amazement and was again tempted into thinking he must certainly be
dreaming.

Under the big branching white lilac tree was an old, sagging, wooden
bench; and on this bench a girl was sitting, playing on an old brown
violin. Her eyes were on the faraway horizon and she did not see Eric.
For a few moments he stood there and looked at her. The pictures she
made photographed itself on his vision to the finest detail, never to
be blotted from his book of remembrance. To his latest day Eric Marshall
will be able to recall vividly that scene as he saw it then--the velvet
darkness of the spruce woods, the overarching sky of soft brilliance,
the swaying lilac blossoms, and amid it all the girl on the old bench
with the violin under her chin.

He had, in his twenty-four years of life, met hundreds of pretty women,
scores of handsome women, a scant half dozen of really beautiful women.
But he knew at once, beyond all possibility of question or doubt, that
he had never seen or imagined anything so exquisite as this girl of the
orchard. Her loveliness was so perfect that his breath almost went from
him in his first delight of it.

Her face was oval, marked in every cameo-like line and feature with
that expression of absolute, flawless purity, found in the angels and
Madonnas of old paintings, a purity that held in it no faintest strain
of earthliness. Her head was bare, and her thick, jet-black hair was
parted above her forehead and hung in two heavy lustrous braids over her
shoulders. Her eyes were of such a blue as Eric had never seen in eyes
before, the tint of the sea in the still, calm light that follows after
a fine sunset; they were as luminous as the stars that came out over
Lindsay Harbour in the afterglow, and were fringed about with very long,
soot-black lashes, and arched over by most delicately pencilled dark
eyebrows. Her skin was as fine and purely tinted as the heart of a white
rose. The collarless dress of pale blue print she wore revealed her
smooth, slender throat; her sleeves were rolled up above her elbows
and the hand which guided the bow of her violin was perhaps the most
beautiful thing about her, perfect in shape and texture, firm and
white, with rosy-nailed taper fingers. One long, drooping plume of lilac
blossom lightly touched her hair and cast a wavering shadow over the
flower-like face beneath it.

There was something very child-like about her, and yet at least eighteen
sweet years must have gone to the making of her. She seemed to be
playing half unconsciously, as if her thoughts were far away in some
fair dreamland of the skies. But presently she looked away from "the
bourne of sunset," and her lovely eyes fell on Eric, standing motionless
before her in the shadow of the apple tree.

The sudden change that swept over her was startling. She sprang to her
feet, the music breaking in mid-strain and the bow slipping from her
hand to the grass. Every hint of colour fled from her face and she
trembled like one of the wind-stirred June lilies.

"I beg your pardon," said Eric hastily. "I am sorry that I have alarmed
you. But your music was so beautiful that I did not remember you were
not aware of my presence here. Please forgive me."

He stopped in dismay, for he suddenly realized that the expression on
the girl's face was one of terror--not merely the startled alarm of
a shy, childlike creature who had thought herself alone, but absolute
terror. It was betrayed in her blanched and quivering lips and in the
widely distended blue eyes that stared back into his with the expression
of some trapped wild thing.

It hurt him that any woman should look at him in such a fashion, at him
who had always held womanhood in such reverence.

"Don't look so frightened," he said gently, thinking only of calming her
fear, and speaking as he would to a child. "I will not hurt you. You are
safe, quite safe."

In his eagerness to reassure her he took an unconscious step forward.
Instantly she turned, and, without a sound, fled across the orchard,
through a gap in the northern fence and along what seemed to be a lane
bordering the fir wood beyond and arched over with wild cherry trees
misty white in the gathering gloom. Before Eric could recover his wits
she had vanished from his sight among the firs.

He stooped and picked up the violin bow, feeling slightly foolish and
very much annoyed.

"Well, this is a most mysterious thing," he said, somewhat impatiently.
"Am I bewitched? Who was she? WHAT was she? Can it be possible that she
is a Lindsay girl? And why in the name of all that's provoking should
she be so frightened at the mere sight of me? I have never thought I
was a particularly hideous person, but certainly this adventure has not
increased my vanity to any perceptible extent. Perhaps I have wandered
into an enchanted orchard, and been outwardly transformed into an ogre.
Now that I have come to think of it, there is something quite uncanny
about the place. Anything might happen here. It is no common orchard for
the production of marketable apples, that is plain to be seen. No, it's
a most unwholesome locality; and the sooner I make my escape from it the
better."

He glanced about it with a whimsical smile. The light was fading rapidly
and the orchard was full of soft, creeping shadows and silences. It
seemed to wink sleepy eyes of impish enjoyment at his perplexity. He
laid the violin bow down on the old bench.

"Well, there is no use in my following her, and I have no right to do
so even if it were of use. But I certainly wish she hadn't fled in such
evident terror. Eyes like hers were never meant to express anything
but tenderness and trust. Why--why--WHY was she so frightened? And
who--who--WHO--can she be?"

All the way home, over fields and pastures that were beginning to be
moonlight silvered he pondered the mystery.

"Let me see," he reflected. "Mr. Williamson was describing the Lindsay
girls for my benefit the other evening. If I remember rightly he said
that there were four handsome ones in the district. What were their
names? Florrie Woods, Melissa Foster--no, Melissa Palmer--Emma Scott,
and Jennie May Ferguson. Can she be one of them? No, it is a flagrant
waste of time and gray matter supposing it. That girl couldn't be a
Florrie or a Melissa or an Emma, while Jennie May is completely out of
the question. Well, there is some bewitchment in the affair. Of that I'm
convinced. So I'd better forget all about it."

But Eric found that it was impossible to forget all about it. The more
he tried to forget, the more keenly and insistently he remembered. The
girl's exquisite face haunted him and the mystery of her tantalized him.

True, he knew that, in all likelihood, he might easily solve the problem
by asking the Williamsons about her. But somehow, to his own surprise,
he found that he shrank from doing this. He felt that it was impossible
to ask Robert Williamson and probably have the girl's name overflowed
in a stream of petty gossip concerning her and all her antecedents and
collaterals to the third and fourth generation. If he had to ask any one
it should be Mrs. Williamson; but he meant to find out the secret for
himself if it were at all possible.

He had planned to go to the harbour the next evening. One of the
lobstermen had promised to take him out cod-fishing. But instead he
wandered southwest over the fields again.

He found the orchard easily--he had half expected NOT to find it. It
was still the same fragrant, grassy, wind-haunted spot. But it had no
occupant and the violin bow was gone from the old bench.

"Perhaps she tiptoed back here for it by the light o' the moon," thought
Eric, pleasing his fancy by the vision of a lithe, girlish figure
stealing with a beating heart through mingled shadow and moonshine. "I
wonder if she will possibly come this evening, or if I have frightened
her away for ever. I'll hide me behind this spruce copse and wait."

Eric waited until dark, but no music sounded through the orchard and no
one came to it. The keenness of his disappointment surprised him, nay
more, it vexed him. What nonsense to be so worked up because a little
girl he had seen for five minutes failed to appear! Where was his
common sense, his "gumption," as old Robert Williamson would have said?
Naturally a man liked to look at a pretty face. But was that any reason
why he should feel as if life were flat, stale, and unprofitable simply
because he could not look at it? He called himself a fool and went home
in a petulant mood. Arriving there, he plunged fiercely into solving
algebraical equations and working out geometry exercises, determined
to put out of his head forthwith all vain imaginings of an enchanted
orchard, white in the moonshine, with lilts of elfin music echoing down
its long arcades.

The next day was Sunday and Eric went to church twice. The Williamson
pew was one of the side ones at the top of the church and its occupants
practically faced the congregation. Eric looked at every girl and woman
in the audience, but he saw nothing of the face which, setting will
power and common sense flatly at defiance, haunted his memory like a
star.

Thomas Gordon was there, sitting alone in his long, empty pew near the
top of the building; and Neil Gordon sang in the choir which occupied
the front pew of the gallery. He had a powerful and melodious, though
untrained voice, which dominated the singing and took the colour out
of the weaker, more commonplace tones of the other singers. He was
well-dressed in a suit of dark blue serge, with a white collar and
tie. But Eric idly thought it did not become him so well as the working
clothes in which he had first seen him. He was too obviously dressed up,
and he looked coarser and more out of harmony with his surroundings.

For two days Eric refused to let himself think of the orchard. Monday
evening he went cod-fishing, and Tuesday evening he went up to play
checkers with Alexander Tracy. Alexander won all the games so easily
that he never had any respect for Eric Marshall again.

"Played like a feller whose thoughts were wool gathering," he complained
to his wife. "He'll never make a checker player--never in this world."