CHAPTER XLVII.

NEWS OF LUCILLA.

Godolphin was about one morning to depart for the convent to which Lucilla
had flown, when a letter was brought to him from the abbess of the convent
herself; it had followed him from Rome.  Lucilla had left her
retreat--left it three days before Godolphin's marriage; the abbess knew
not whither, but believed she intended to reside in Rome.  She inclosed
him a note from Lucilla, left for him before her departure.  Short but
characteristic, it ran thus:

     LUCILLA TO GODOLPHIN.

"I can stay here no longer; my mind will not submit to quiet; this
inactivity wears me to madness.  Besides, I want to see thy wife.  I shall
go to Rome; I shall witness thy wedding; and then--ah! what then?  Give
me back.  Godolphin, oh; give me back the young pure heart I had ere I
loved you!  Then, I could take joy in all things:--now!  But I will not
repine; it is beneath me.  I, the daughter of the stars, am no love-sick
and nerveless minion of a vain regret; my pride is roused at last, and I
feel at least the independence of being alone.  Wild and roving shall be
my future life; that lot which denies me hope, has raised me above all
fear.  Love makes us all the woman; love has left me, and something hard
and venturous, something that belongs to they sex, has come in its stead.

"You have left me money--I thank you--I thank you--I thank you; my heart
almost chokes me as I write this.  Could you think of me so basely?--For
shame, man! if my child--our child were living (and O, Percy, she had
thine eyes!), I would see her starve inch by inch rather than touch one
doit of thy bounty!  But she is dead--thank God!  Fear not for me, I shall
not starve; these hands can support life.  God bless thee--loved as thou
still art!  If, years hence, I should feel my end draw near, I will drag
myself to thy country, and look once more on thy face before I die."

Godolphin sank down, and covered his face with his hands.  Constance took
up the letter.  "Ay--read it!" said he in a hollow voice.  She did so,
and when she had finished, the proud Constance, struck by a spirit like
her own, bathed the letter in her tears.  This pleased--this touched--this
consoled Godolphin more than the most elaborate comforting.  "Poor girl!"
said Constance, through her tears, "this must not be; she must not be left
on the wide world to her own despairing heart.  Let us both go to Rome,
and seek her out.  I will persuade her to accept what she refuses from
you."

Godolphin pressed his wife's hand, but spoke not.  They went that day to
Rome.  Lucilla had departed for Leghorn, and thence taken her passage in a
vessel bound to the northern coasts of Europe.  Perhaps she had sought her
father's land?  With that hope, in the absence of all others, they
attempted to console themselves.