CHAPTER LIV.

THE CAREER OF CONSTANCE.--REAL STATE OF HER FEELINGS TOWARDS
GODOLPHIN.--RAPID SUCCESSION OF POLITICAL EVENTS.--CANNING'S
ADMINISTRATION.--CATHOLIC QUESTION.--LORD GREY'S SPEECH.--CANNING'S DEATH.

While in scenes like these, alternated with more refined and polished
dissipation, Godolphin lavished away his life, Constance, became more and
more powerful as one of the ornaments of a great political party.  Few
women in England ever mixed more actively in politics than Lady Erpingham,
or with more remarkable ability.  Her friends were out of office, it is
true; but she saw the time approaching rapidly when their opinions must
come into power.  She bad begun to love, for itself, the scheming of
political ambition, and in any country but England she would have been a
conspirator, and in old times might have risen to be a queen; but as it
was, she was only a proud, discontented woman.  She knew, too, that it was
all she could be--all that her sex allowed her to be--yet did she not the
less straggle and toil on.  The fate of her father still haunted her; her
promise and his death-bed still rose oft and solemnly before leer; the
humiliations she had known in her early condition--the homage that had
attended her later career--still cherished in her haughty soul indignation
at the faction he had execrated, and little less of the mighty class which
that faction represented.  The system of "fashion" she had so mainly
contributed to strengthen, and which was originally by her intended to
build up a standard of opinion, independent of mere rank, and in defiance
of mere wealth, she saw polluted and debased by the nature of its
followers, into a vulgar effrontery, which was worse than the more quiet
dulness it had attempted to supplant.  Yet still she was comforted by the
thought that through this system lay the way to more wholesome changes.
The idols of rank and wealth once broken, she believed that a pure and
sane worship must ultimately be established.  Doubtless in the old French
regime there were many women who thought like her, but there were none who
acted like her--deliberately, and with an end.  What an excellent, what a
warning picture is contained in the entertaining Memoirs of Count Segur!
how admirably that agreeable gossip develops the state of mind among the
nobility of France!--"merry censurers of the old customs"--"enchanted by
the pbilosophy of Voltaire"--"ridiculing the old system"--"embracing
liberality as a fashion," and "gaily treading a soil bedecked with
flowers, which concealed a precipice from their view!"  In England, there
are fewer flowers, and the precipice will be less fearful.

A certain disappointment which had attended her marriage with Godolphin,
and the disdainful resentment she felt at the pleasures that allured him
from her, tended yet more to deepen at once her distaste for the habits of
a frivolous society, and to nerve and concentrate her powers of political
intrigue.  Her mind grew more and more masculine; her dark eye burnt with
a sterner fire; the sweet mouth was less prodigal of its smiles; and that
air of dignity which she had always possessed, grew harder in its
character, and became command.

This change did not tend to draw Godolphin nearer to her.  He, so
susceptible to coldness, so refining, so exacting, believed fully that she
loved him no more--that she repented the marriage she had contracted.  His
pride was armed against her; and he sought more eagerly those scenes where
all, for the admired, the gallant, the sparkling Godolphin, wore smiles
and sunshine.

There was another matter that rankled in his breast with peculiar
bitterness.  He had wished to raise a large sum of money (in the purchase
of some celebrated works of art), which could only be raised with Lady
Erpingham's consent.  When he had touched upon the point to her, she had
not refused, but she had hesitated.  She seemed embarrassed, and, he
thought, discontented.  His delicacy took alarm, and he never referred to
the question again; but he was secretly much displeased with her reluctant
manner on that occasion.  Nothing the proud so little forget as a coolness
conceived upon money matters:  In this instance, Godolphin afterwards
discovered that he had wronged Constance, and misinterpreted the cause of
her reluctance.

Yet as time flew on for both, both felt a yearning of the heart towards
each other; and had they been thrown upon a desert island--had there been
full leisure, full opportunity, for a frank unfettered interchange and
confession of thought--they would have been mutually astonished to find
themselves still so beloved, and each would have been dearer to the other
than in their warmest hour of earlier attachment.  But when once, in a
very gay and occupied life, a husband and wife have admitted a seeming
indifference to creep in between them, the chances are a thousand to one
against its after-removal.  How much more so with a wife so proud as
Constance, and a husband so refining as Godolphin!  Fortunately, however,
as I said before, the temper of each was excellent; they never quarrelled;
and the indifference, therefore, lay on the surface, not at the depth.
They seemed to the world an affectionate couple, as couples go; and their
union would have been classed by Rochefoucauld among those marriages that
are very happy--il n'y a point de delicieux.

Meanwhile, as Constance had predicted, the political history of the
country was marked by a perpetual progress towards liberal opinions.  Mr.
Canning was now in office; the Catholic Question was in every one's mouth.

There was a brilliant meeting at Erpingham House; those who composed it
were of the heads of the party: but there were divisions amongst
themselves; some were secretly for joining Mr. Canning's administration;
some had openly done so; others remained in stubborn and jealous
opposition.  With these last was the heart of Constance.  "Well, well,
Lady Erpingham," said Lord Paul Plympton, a young nobleman, who had
written a dull history, and was therefore considered likely to succeed in
parliamentary life--"well, I cannot help thinking you are too severe upon
Canning: he is certainly very liberal in his views."

"Is there one law he ever caused to pass for the benefit of the working
classes?  No, Lord Paul, his Whiggism is for peers, and his Toryism for
peasants.  With the same zeal he advocates the Catholic Question and the
Manchester Massacre."

"Yet, surely," cried Lord Paul, "you make a difference between the just
liberality that provides for property and intelligence, and the dangerous
liberality that would slacken the reins of an ignorant multitude."

"But," said Mr. Benson, a very powerful member of the Lower House, "true
politicians must conform to circumstances.  Canning may not be all we
wish, but still he ought to be supported.  I confess that I shall be
generous I care not for office, I care not for power; but Canning is
surrounded with enemies, who are enemies also to the people: for that
reason I shall support him."

"Bravo, Benson!" cried Lord Paul.

"Bravo, Benson!" echoed two or three notables, who had waited an
opportunity to declare themselves; "that's what I call handsome."

"Manly!"

"Fair!"

"Disinterested, by Jove!"

Here the Duke of Aspindale suddenly entered the room.  "Ah, Lady
Erpingham, you should have been in the Lords to-night; such a speech!
Canning is crushed for ever!"

"Speech! from whom?"

"Lord Grey--terrific: it was the vengeance of a life concentrated into one
hour; it has shaken the Ministry fearfully."

"Humph!" said Benson, rising; "I shall go to Brooks's and hear more."

"And I too," said Lord Paul.

A day or two after, Benson in presenting a petition, alluded in terms of
high eulogy to the masterly speech made "in another place:" and Lord Paul
Plympton said, "it was indeed unequalled."

That's what I call handsome.  Manly!

Fair!

Disinterested, by Jove!

And Canning died; his gallant soul left the field of politics broken into
a thousand petty parties.  From the time of his death the two great hosts
into which the struggles for power were divided have never recovered their
former strength.  The demarcation that his policy had tended to efface was
afterwards more weakened by his successor, the Duke of Wellington; and had
it not been for the question of Reform that again drew the stragglers on
either side around one determined banner, it is likely that Whig and Tory
would, among the many minute sections and shades of difference, have lost
for ever the two broad distinguishing colours of their separate factions.

Mr. Canning died; and now, with redoubled energy, went on the wheels of
political intrigue.  The rapid succession of short-lived administrations,
the leisure of a prolonged peace, the pressure of debt, the writings of
philosophers, all, insensibly, yet quickly, excited that popular
temperament which found its crisis in the Reform Bill.