                              CHAPTER II

                        DICK PARMITER'S STORY


I woke up at mid-day, and lay for awhile in my bed anticipating
wearily the eight limping hours to come before the evening fell, and
wondering how I might best escape them. From that debate my thoughts
drifted to the events of the night before, and I recollected with a
sudden thrill of interest, rare enough to surprise me, the coming of
Dick Parmiter, and his treatment at Clutterbuck's hands and his
departure. I thought of his long journey to London along strange
roads. I could see him tramping the dusty miles, each step leading him
farther from that small corner of the world with which alone he was
familiar. I imagined him now sleeping beneath a hedge, now perhaps, by
some rare fortune, in one of Russell's waggons with the Falmouth
mails, which at nightfall he had overtaken, and from which at daybreak
he would descend with a hurried word of thanks to get the quicker on
his way; I pictured him pressing through the towns with a growing fear
at his heart, because of their turmoil and their crowds; and I thought
of him as hungering daily more and more for the sea which he had left
behind, like a sheep-dog which one has taken from the sheep and shut
up within the walls of a city. The boy's spirit appealed to me. It was
new, it was admirable; and I dressed that day with an uncommon
alertness and got me out to Clutterbuck's lodgings.

I found the lieutenant in bed with a tankard of small ale at his
bedside. He looked me over with astonishment.

"I wish I could carry my liquor as well as you do," said he, taking a
pull at the tankard.

"Has the boy come back?" I asked.

"What, Dick?" said he. "No, nor will not." And changing the subject,
"If you will wait, Steve, I will make a shift to get up."

I went into his parlour. The room had been put into some sort of
order; but the shattered remnant of the mirror still hung between the
windows, and it too spoke to me of Dick's journey. I imagined him
coming to the great city at the fall of night, and seeking out his way
through its alleys and streets to Lieutenant Clutterbuck's lodgings. I
could see him on the stairs pausing to listen to the confusion within
the rooms, and in the passage opening and closing the door as he
hesitated whether to go in or no. I became all at once very curious to
know what the errand was which had pushed him so far from his home,
and I cudgelled my brains to recollect his story. But I could remember
only the youth Cullen Mayle, who had sat in the stocks on a Sunday
morning, and the girl Helen, and a negro who slept and slept, and a
house with a desolate tangled garden by the sea, and men watching the
house. But what bound these people and the house in a common history,
as to that I was entirely in the dark.

"Steve," said Clutterbuck--I had not remarked his entrance--"you look
glum as a November morning. Is it a sore head? or is it the sight of
your mischievous handiwork?" and he pointed to the mirror.

"It's neither one nor the other," said I. "It's just the recollection
of that boy fumbling under the table for his cap, and dragging himself
silently out of the room, with all England to tramp and despair to
sustain him."

"That boy!" cried Clutterbuck, with great exasperation. "Curse you,
Berkeley. That boy's a maggot, and has crept into your brains. We'll
talk no more of him, if you please." He took a pack of cards from a
corner cupboard, and, tossing them on the table, "Here, choose your
game I'll play what you will, and for what stakes you will, so long as
you hold your tongue."

It was plain that I should learn nothing by pressing my curiosity upon
him. I must go another way to work. But chance and Lieutenant
Clutterbuck served my turn without any provocation from myself.

I chose the game of picquet, and Clutterbuck shuffled and cut the
cards; whereupon I dealt them. Clutterbuck looked at his hand
fretfully, and then cried out:

"I have no hand for picquet, but I have very good putt cards."

I glanced through the cards I held.

"Make it putt, then," said I. "I will wager what you will my hand is
the better;" and Clutterbuck broke into a laugh and tossed his cards
upon the table.

"You have two kings and an ace," said he, "I know very well; but I
have two kings and a deuce, and mine are the better."

"It is a bite," said I.

"And an ingenious one," he returned. "It was Cullen Mayle who taught
it to us in the mess at Star Castle. For packing the cards or knapping
the dice I never came across his equal. Yet we could never detect him,
and in the end not a soul in the garrison would play with him for
crooked pins."

"Cullen Mayle," said I; "that was Adam's son."

Clutterbuck had sunk into something of a reverie, and spoke rather to
himself than to me.

"They were the strangest pair," he continued; "you would never take
them for father and son, and I myself was always amazed to think there
was any relationship between them. I have seen them sitting side by
side on the settle in the kitchen of the 'Palace Inn' at Tresco. Adam,
an old bulky fellow, with a mulberry face and yellow angry eyes, and
his great hands and feet twisted out of all belief. His stories were
all of wild doings on the Guinea coast. Cullen, on the other hand, was
a stripling with a soft face like a girl's, exquisite in his dress,
urbane in his manners. He had a gentle word and an attentive ear for
each newcomer to the fire, and a white protesting hand for the oaths
with which Adam salted his speech. Yet they were both of the same
vindictive, turbulent spirit, only Cullen was the more dangerous.

"I have watched the gannets often through an afternoon in Hell Bay
over at Brehar. They would circle high up in the air where no fish
could see them, and then slant their wings and drop giddily with the
splash of a stone upon their prey. They always put me in mind of
Cullen Mayle. He struck mighty quick and out of the sky. I cannot
remember, during all the ten years I lived at the Scillies, that any
man crossed Cullen Mayle, though unwittingly, but some odd accident
crippled him. He was the more dangerous of the pair. With Adam it was
a word and a blow. With Cullen a word and another and another, and all
of them soft, and the blow held over for a secret occasion. But it
fell. If ever you come across Cullen Mayle, Berkeley, take care of
your words and your deeds, for he strikes out of the sky and mighty
quick."

This Clutterbuck said with an extreme earnestness, leaning forward to
me as he spoke. And even now I can but put it down to his earnestness
that a shiver took me at the words; for nothing was more unlikely than
that I should ever come to grips with Cullen Mayle, and the next
moment I answered Clutterbuck lightly.

"Yet he sat in the stocks in the end," said I, with as much
indifference as I could counterfeit; for I was afraid lest any display
of eagerness might close his lips. Lieutenant Clutterbuck, however,
was hardly aware that he was being questioned. He laughed with a
certain pleasure.

"Yes. A schooner, with a cargo of brandy, came ashore on Tresco.
Cullen and the Tresco men saved the cargo and hid it away, and when
the collector came over with his men from the Customs House upon St.
Mary's, Cullen drove him back to his boats with a broken head. Cullen
broke old Captain Hathaway's patience at the same time. Hathaway took
off his silver spectacles at last and shut up his _Diodorus Siculus_
with a bang; and so Cullen Mayle sat in the stocks before the Customs
House on the Sunday morning. He left the islands that night. That was
two years and a month ago."

"And what had Dick Parmiter to do with Cullen Mayle?" said I.

"Dick?" said he. "Oh, Dick was Cullen Mayle's henchman. But it seems
that Dick has transferred his allegiance to----" And he stopped
abruptly. His face soured as he stopped.

"To the girl Helen?" said I, quite forgetting my indifference.

"Yes!" cried Clutterbuck, savagely, "to the girl Helen. He is fifteen
years old is Dick. But at fifteen years a lad is ripe to be one of
Cupid's April fools." And after that he would say no more.

His last words, however, and, more than his words, the tone in which
he spoke, had given me the first definite clue of the many for which
my curiosity searched. It was certainly on behalf of the girl, whom I
only knew as Helen, that Dick had undertaken his arduous errand, and
it was no less certain that just for that reason Lieutenant
Clutterbuck had refused to meddle in the matter. I recognised that I
should get no advantage from persisting, but I kept close to his side
that day waiting upon opportunity.

We dined together at Locket's, by Charing Cross; we walked together to
the "Cocoa Tree" in St. James's Street, and passed an hour or so with
a dice-box. Clutterbuck was very silent for the most part. He handled
the dice-box with indifference; and, since he was never the man to
keep his thoughts for any long time to himself, I had no doubt that
some time that day I should learn more. Indeed, very soon after we
left the "Cocoa Tree" I thought the whole truth was coming out; for he
stopped in St. James's Park, close to the Mall, which at that moment
was quiet and deserted. We could hear a light wind rippling through
the leaves of the poplars, and a faint rumble of carriages lurching
over the stones of Pall Mall.

"It is very like the sound of the sea on a still morning of summer,"
said he, looking at me with a vacant eye, and I wondered whether he
was thinking of a tangled garden raised above a beach of sand,
wherein, maybe, he had walked, and not alone on some such day as this
two years ago.

We crossed the water to the Spring Gardens at Vauxhall, where we
supped. I was now fallen into as complete a silence and abstraction as
Clutterbuck himself, for I was clean lost in conjectures, I knew
something now of Adam Mayle and his son Cullen, but as to Helen I was
in the dark. Was her name Mayle too? Was she wife to Cullen? The sight
of Clutterbuck's ill-humour inclined me to that conjecture; but I was
wrong, for as the attendants were putting out the lights in the garden
I ventured upon the question. To my surprise, Clutterbuck answered me
with a smile.

"Sure," said he, "you are the most pertinacious fellow. What's come to
you, who were content to drink your liquor and sit on one side while
the world went by? No, she was not wife to Cullen Mayle, nor sister.
She was a waif of the sea. Adam Mayle picked her up from the rocks a
long while since. It was the only action that could be counted to his
credit since he came out of nowhere and leased the granite house of
Tresco. A barque--a Venetian vessel, it was thought, from Marseilles,
in France, for a great deal of Castile soap, and almonds and oil was
washed ashore afterwards--drove in a northwesterly gale on to the
Golden Bar reef. The reef runs out from St. Helen's Island, opposite
Adam Mayle's window. Adam put out his lugger and crossed the sound,
but before he could reach St. Helen's the ship went down into fourteen
fathoms of water. He landed on St. Helen's, however, and amongst the
rocks where the reef joins the land he came across a sailor, who lay
in the posture of death, and yet wailed like a hungry child. The
sailor was dead, but within his jacket, buttoned up on his breast, was
a child of four years or so. Adam took her home. No one ever claimed
her, so he kept her, and called her Helen from the island on which she
was wrecked. That was a long time since, for the girl must be twenty."

"Is she French?" I asked.

"French, or Venetian, or Spanish, or what you will," he cried. "It
matters very little what country a woman springs from. I have no doubt
that a Hottentot squaw will play you the same tricks as a woman of
fashion, and with as demure a countenance. Well, it seems we are to go
to bed sober;" and we went each to his lodging.

For my part, I lay awake for a long time, seeking to weave into some
sort of continuous story what I had heard that day from Lieutenant
Clutterbuck and the scraps which I remembered of Parmiter's talk. But
old Adam Mayle, who was dead; Cullen, the gannet who struck from the
skies; and even Helen, the waif of the sea--these were at this time no
more to me than a showman's puppets; marionettes of sawdust and wood,
that faced this way and that way according as I pulled the strings.
The one being who had life was the boy Parmiter, with his jersey and
his red fisherman's bonnet; and I very soon turned to conjecturing how
he fared upon his journey.

Had he money to help him forward? Had he fallen in with a kindly
carrier? How far had he travelled? I had no doubt that, whether he had
money or no, he would reach his journey's end. His spirit was evident
in the resolve to travel to London, in his success, and in the
concealment of any weakness until the favour he asked for had been
refused.

I bought next morning one of the new maps of the Great West Road and
began to pick off the stages of his journey. This was the second day
since he had started. He would not travel very fast, having no good
news to lighten his feet. I reckoned that he would have reached the
"Golden Farmer," and I made a mark at that name on the map. Every day
for a week I kept in this way an imagined tally of his progress,
following him from county to county; and at the end of the week,
coming out in the evening from my lodging at the corner of St. James's
Street, I ran plump into the arms of the gentleman I had met at
Clutterbuck's, and whose name I did not know. But his familiarity was
all gone from him. He bowed to me stiffly, and would have passed on,
but I caught him by the arm.

"Sir," said I, "you will remember a certain night when I had the
honour of your acquaintance."

"Mr. Berkeley," he returned with a smile, "I remember very much better
the dreadful morning which followed it."

"You will not, at all events, have forgotten the boy whom you
discovered outside the door, and if you can repeat the story which he
told, or some portion of it, I shall be obliged to you."

He looked at his watch.

"I have still half an hour to spare," said he; and he led the way to
the "Groom Porters." The night was young, but not so young but what
the Bassett-table was already full. We sat down together in a dark
corner of the room, and my companion told me what he remembered of
Parmiter's story.

It appeared that Cullen Mayle had quarrelled with his father on that
Sunday night after he had sat in the stocks and had left the house. He
had never returned. A year ago Adam Mayle had died, bequeathing his
fortune, which was considerable, and most of it placed in the African
Company, to his adopted daughter Helen. She, however, declared that
she had no right to it, that it was not hers, and that she would hold
it in trust until such time as Cullen should come back to claim it.

He did not come back, as has been said; but eight months later Dick
Parmiter, on an occasion when he had crossed in his father's fishing
boat to Cornwall, had discovered upon Penzance Quay a small crowd of
loiterers, and on the ground amongst them, with his back propped
against a wall, a negro asleep. A paper was being passed from hand to
hand among the group, and in the end it came to Dick Parmiter. Upon
the paper was written Adam Mayle's name and the place of his
residence, Tresco, in the Scilly Islands; and Dick at once recognised
that the writing was in Cullen Mayle's hand. He pushed to the front of
the group, and stooping down, shook the negro by the shoulder. The
negro drowsily opened his eyes.

"You come from Mr. Cullen Mayle?" said Dick.

"Yes," said the negro, speaking in English and quite clearly.

"You have a message from him?"

"Yes."

"What is it?" asked Dick; and he put a number of questions eagerly.
But in the midst of them, and while still looking at Dick, the negro
closed his eyes deliberately and fell asleep.

"See," cried a sailor, an oldish white-haired man, with a French
accent; "that is the way with him. He came aboard with us at the port
of London as wide awake as you or I. Bound for Penzance he was, and
the drowsiness took him the second day out. At first he would talk a
little; but each day he slept more and more, until now he will say no
more than a 'Yes' or a 'No.' Why, he will fall asleep over his
dinner."

Dick shook the negro again.

"Do you wish to cross to Tresco?"

"Yes," said the negro.

Dick carried him back to Scilly and brought him to the house on
Tresco, where Helen Mayle now lived alone. But no news could be got
from him. He would answer "Yes" or "No" and eat his meals; but when it
came to a question of his message or Cullen Mayle's whereabouts he
closed his eyes and fell asleep. Helen judged that somewhere Cullen
was in great need and distress, and because she held his money, and
could do nothing to succour him, she was thrown into an extreme
trouble. There was some reason why he could not come to Scilly in
person, and here at her hand was the man sent to tell the reason; but
he could not because of his mysterious malady. More than once he tried
with a look of deep sadness in his eyes, as though he was conscious of
his helplessness, but he never got beyond the first word. His eyelids
closed while his mouth was still open to speak, and at once he was
asleep. His presence made a great noise amongst the islands; from
Brehar, from St. Mary's, and from St. Martin's the people sailed over
to look at him. But Helen, knowing Cullen Mayle and fearing the nature
of his misadventure, had bidden Parmiter to let slip no hint that he
had come on Cullen's account.

So the negro stayed at Tresco and spread a great gloom throughout the
house. They watched him day by day as he slept. Cullen's need might be
immediate; it might be a matter of crime; it might be a matter of life
and death. The gloom deepened into horror, and Helen and her few
servants, and Dick, who was much in the house, fell into so lively an
apprehension that the mere creaking of a door would make them start, a
foot crunching on the sand outside sent them flying to the window. So
for a month, until Dick Parmiter, coming over the hill from New
Grimsby harbour at night, had a lantern flashed in his face, and when
close to the house saw a man spring up from the gorse and watch him as
he passed. From that night the house was continually spied upon, and
Helen walked continually from room to room wringing her hands in sheer
distraction at her helplessness. She feared that they were watching
for Cullen; she feared, too, that Cullen, receiving no answer to his
message, would come himself and fall into their hands. She dared
hardly conjecture for what reason they were watching, since she knew
Cullen. For a week these men watched, five of them, who kept their
watches as at sea; and then Dick, taking his courage in his hands, and
bethinking him of Lieutenant Clutterbuck, who had been an assiduous
visitor at the house on Tresco, had crossed over to St. Mary's and
learned from old Captain Hathaway where he now lived. He had said
nothing of his purpose to Helen, partly from a certain shyness at
speaking to her upon a topic of some delicacy, and partly lest he
should awaken her hopes and perhaps only disappoint them. But he had
begged a passage in a ship that was sailing to Cornwall, and, crossing
thither secretly, had made his way in six weeks to London.

This is the story which my acquaintance repeated to me as we sat in
the "Groom Porters."

"And Clutterbuck refused to meddle in the matter," said I. "Poor lad!"

I was thinking of Dick, but my companion mistook my meaning, for he
glanced thoughtfully at me for a second.

"I think you are very right to pity him," he said; "although, Mr.
Berkeley, if you will pardon me, I am a trifle surprised to hear that
sentiment from you. It is indeed a sodden, pitiful, miserable dog's
life that Clutterbuck leads. To pass the morning over his toilette, to
loiter through the afternoon in a boudoir, and to dispose of the
evening so that he may be drunk before midnight! He would be much
better taking the good air into his lungs and setting his wits to
unknot that tangle amongst those islands in the sea. But I have
overstayed my time. If you can persuade him to that, you will be doing
him no small service;" and politely taking his leave, he went out of
the room.

I sat for some while longer in the corner. I could not pretend that
he had spoken anything but truth, but I found his words none the less
bitter on that account. A pitiful dog's life for Lieutenant
Clutterbuck, who was at the most twenty-four years of age! What, then,
was it for me, who had seven years the better of Lieutenant
Clutterbuck, or rather, I should say, seven years the worse? I was
thirty-one that very month, and Clutterbuck's sodden, pitiful life had
been mine for the last seven years. An utter disgust took hold of me
as I repeated over and over to myself my strange friend's words. I
looked at the green cloth and the yellow candles, and the wolfish
faces about the cloth. The candles had grown soft with the heat of the
night, and were bent out of their shape, so that the grease dropped in
great blots upon the cloth, and the air was close with an odour of
stale punch. I got up from my corner and went out into the street,
and stood by the water in St. James's Park, If only some such
summons had come to me when I was twenty-four as had now come to
Clutterbuck!--well, very likely I should have turned a deaf ear to
it, even as he had done! And--and, at all events, I was thirty-one and
the summons had not come to me, and there was an end of the matter.
To-morrow I should go back to the green cloth and not trouble my
head about the grease blots; but to-night, since Clutterbuck was
twenty-four, I would try to do him that small service of which the
stranger spoke, and so setting out at a round pace I made my way to
Clutterbuck's lodging.