IV

JASPER'S BOAST


JASPER JAY had said nothing to anyone concerning the horrid call, which
had sounded twice--each time at midday. But now that he felt sure the
strange bird whose cry he had heard must have come to live in Pleasant
Valley, he could no longer keep from mentioning the matter.

Chancing to meet his cousin, Mr. Crow, the next morning, Jasper stopped
to talk with the old gentleman. You see, Mr. Crow was widely known as a
gossip. He usually knew what was going on in the neighborhood. So Jasper
thought it likely that Mr. Crow could tell him all about the unwelcome
stranger. "Perhaps," he thought, "the old scamp has already seen him."

Of course, Jasper never termed his cousin a scamp to his face. He always
spoke to him very politely, greeting him as "Mr. Crow," in spite of
their close relationship. And there was a reason why Jasper did that.
Mr. Crow had once given him a severe beating because Jasper had called
him something else. And Jasper Jay never forgot it.

Now Jasper first inquired after his cousin's health. He did that to put
old Mr. Crow in a good humor. But Jasper was sorry at once that he had
started Mr. Crow to talking about his ills. It happened that the old
gentleman was then suffering from gout, hay-fever and housemaid's knee.
And he liked to talk about his ailments. Living all alone as he did, he
had nobody to do his housework. And that, he complained, was the reason
why his knee troubled him.

Jasper Jay fidgeted about while Mr. Crow was telling him all that--and
much more--concerning his troubles. Jasper really did not care to hear
about them.

"Yes! yes!" he exclaimed impatiently, for it seemed to him that old Mr.
Crow never would stop talking about himself. "Now that we're having a
good spell of weather you ought to begin to feel better. And what's the
news, Mr. Crow? Have you heard of anything happening around here
lately?"

The old gentleman shook his head.

"Things are quiet," he said.

"Nobody left Pleasant Valley recently?" Jasper inquired.

"Not that I've heard of," replied Mr. Crow.

"_No strangers come here to live?_" Jasper asked him.

"No one at all!" said Mr. Crow.

"That's queer!" Jasper exclaimed. "I was sure I heard a new voice
yesterday. And I heard it again to-day, too--at exactly the same time."

"What did it sound like?" Mr. Crow wanted to know.

So Jasper gave an imitation of the odd cry that had swept the valley.

"It was quite loud and very unpleasant to hear," he remarked. "And
whoever the stranger may be, if he's going to disturb me every noon like
that when I'm having my midday rest I shall have to drive him out of the
neighborhood."

"It's almost noon now," said old Mr. Crow, cocking his eye at the sun.
"Perhaps we'll hear the cry soon."

The words were scarcely out of his bill when a far-reaching call caught
the attention of the two cousins. It brought Jasper Jay to his tiptoes
at once. And he craned his neck in an effort to catch a glimpse of the
stranger who possessed such a powerful voice.

"There it is!" Jasper cried. "There's the call again! Do you know what
kind of bird makes that cry?"

Something seemed to have stuck in Mr. Crow's throat. At least, he
spluttered and choked and coughed. And he was quite unable to answer
just then. But after the mountains had quit tossing the sound back and
forth and all was quiet again he said:

"No small bird could make a sound like that. And if you can drive him
out of Pleasant Valley you're a better fighter than I ever supposed."

Mr. Crow might have known that his remark would not please Jasper Jay.
Jasper gave his cousin an angry glance; and he looked as if he would
have liked to fight _him_. But he had suffered one beating by his
elderly cousin. And he didn't care for another. So he only sneered
openly. And then he screamed in a loud voice:

"I'll find that noisy fellow and drive him out of Pleasant Valley, if it
takes me all summer to do it!" And he raised his crest, and snapped his
beak together, and stamped his feet, so that he looked very fierce
indeed.

But old Mr. Crow was not frightened in the least. He only smiled.

"Let me know when you've driven the stranger away," he said.

"Oh! you'll hear about it," Jasper Jay assured him. "It will be the most
famous fight that will ever take place in this valley," he boasted. And
then the two cousins parted. It did not put Jasper Jay in any better
humor to hear Mr. Crow's hoarse _haw-haw_ echoing across the valley. Of
course, Jasper did not know what he was laughing at. But that only
served to make the blue-coated scamp all the more peevish.