IX

JASPER HAS TO HIDE


WHEN Jasper Jay looked up and saw Mr. Red-shouldered Hawk darting down
upon him from above, he dodged to one side and screamed loudly for help.

His friend Noisy Jake was known as a great fighter. And Jasper hoped
that together they might be able to drive Mr. Hawk away.

But he was disappointed. Noisy Jake did not appear. And there was a good
reason why he did not. At that very moment he was flying off across the
meadow as fast as his beautiful wings could carry him. He had seen Mr.
Hawk circling above the barnyard. And he had lost no time in making his
escape.

But Jasper Jay knew nothing of all that. And when he found that there
was no one to help him he was just as frightened as the hens had been.
He knew that he was no match for Mr. Hawk. And he had no wish to make a
meal for him. Jasper was quite willing to leave that pleasure to the
frogs that splashed their time away along the banks of Black Creek.

For a few moments Jasper ducked first one way and then another. He had
several narrow escapes. And there's no telling what might have happened
if he hadn't suddenly decided that he would follow the hens' example.

So without even stopping to knock on the door he dashed into the chicken
house and alighted on a roost in the darkest corner he could find.

For two excellent reasons Mr. Red-shouldered Hawk did not follow him.
First, he had always made it a rule never to go inside one of Farmer
Green's buildings. And second, he happened to catch a glimpse of Farmer
Green running into the house through the kitchen door.

Mr. Hawk knew what that meant. Farmer Green was going for his gun! And
so he winged his way swiftly toward Black Creek, hoping--as he
went--that he had taught Jasper Jay a lesson.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, there was a great uproar in the chicken house. But Farmer
Green paid no attention to that--supposing, of course, that it was
merely because of the fright the hawk had given the hens.

For once there was more noise than even Jasper Jay liked. It appeared
that there was a bold young rooster in the chicken house. And he
objected to Jasper Jay's presence.

"What do you mean by coming in here where you're not wanted?" he
screamed. "Where are your manners?"

Actually, Jasper Jay wondered what the rooster was talking about. Never
having had any manners, Jasper didn't know the meaning of the word. And
since he could not answer, he said nothing.

"Stick your spurs into him and maybe he'll speak!" screeched a pert
young hen.

Jasper looked at the rooster then; and he saw that the brazen fellow
wore long, sharp spurs upon his legs. They looked almost as wicked as
Mr. Hawk's cruel talons.

"Please," said Jasper, "I've come in to get out of the way of Mr. Hawk."

"Ha!" cried the rooster. "Unless I'm mistaken you're the rogue that's
always frightening the ladies by screaming like Mr. Hawk. So I don't
see why you should object to his society."

"I was only fooling," Jasper Jay whined. "I meant no harm, you know. Let
me stay here a while and I promise you I won't bother the hens again."

"I accept your apology, as well as your promise," the rooster replied
with great dignity. And then he began crowing in a manner that was most
annoying to Jasper Jay. It was the same as saying, "This rascal's afraid
of me!"

That was true, too. And that was what made the crowing sound so
unpleasant in Jasper's ears.

He left as soon as he dared show himself out of doors. And he sometimes
remarked afterward that a chicken house wouldn't be a bad place to live
in, after all, if it weren't for the roosters.

"They boast too much," said Jasper Jay. "Nothing could induce me to
listen to their silly crowing. And to tell the truth, I don't see how
the hens manage to stand it."