XIII

TEASING A SINGER


THOUGH there were many feathered folk in Pleasant Valley, Jasper Jay did
not care to have much to do with any except his own family. Unless he
had other business that was more urgent he was always ready to join a
troop of noisy blue jays bent on some mischief. But if there were none
of his own kind about, Jasper usually preferred to be alone.

Strangely enough, Jasper did not even like to hear other birds singing.
He claimed that their voices were altogether too sweet.

"It's sickening to hear their songs," he used to say. "Somebody ought
to put a stop to these concerts that we have to listen to all summer
long." And he was always telling people that what he liked was a good,
loud, jarring call, that you could hear without any trouble. "These
soft, musical notes are all nonsense!" he declared.

Jasper held it to be his duty, whenever he chanced to come across one of
those forest concerts, to seat himself in a nearby tree and make as much
noise as he could, in order to interrupt the singing.

Of course, such actions on the part of Jasper Jay did not make the
songsters of Pleasant Valley like him any better. But Jasper never
minded that.

"I shall keep right on interrupting these singing societies," he said,
"until I've put an end to such nuisances."

Naturally, that was only his way of looking at such matters. As for the
other birds, they thought that the real nuisance was Jasper Jay.

Now, one of the finest singers in the whole neighborhood was Buddy
Brown-Thrasher. Though he belonged to the Pleasant Valley Singing
Society, he sang so well that he usually preferred to sing by himself,
instead of attending a singing party. Each morning and each evening he
would seat himself in the topmost branches of a tree near the thicket
where he lived; and there he would sing his favorite song over and over
again.

Often other birds some distance away would cease their own music just to
enjoy his, for it was very beautiful. If a wooden Indian had roamed
through the woods where Buddy Brown-Thrasher was singing, he would have
stopped to listen. Nobody could have helped doing that.

At least, nobody could have helped listening except Jasper Jay. In his
opinion, Buddy Brown-Thrasher was the most annoying of all the feathered
songsters. He often went out of his way to interrupt Buddy's
evening-song. (In the morning Jasper was in too great a hurry for his
breakfast to trouble himself in any such fashion.)

Well, it is not surprising that Buddy Brown-Thrasher should be upset by
Jasper Jay's provoking visits. It is scarcely pleasant, when you are
singing your best notes in a tree-top, to have them suddenly spoiled by
a harsh _jay, jay_, and to be mocked with boisterous laughter. The time
came at last when Buddy Brown-Thrasher said he couldn't stand it any
longer.

"Something will have to be done!" he declared. So he put on his
thinking-cap at once. Being a gentlemanly sort of person, he never once
thought of _fighting_ Jasper Jay. But he felt sure that there must be
some way to teach Jasper better manners. He knew, however, that there
was no use of trying to reason with the rude fellow. If he had merely
talked with Jasper, and asked him if he wouldn't please do differently,
Buddy Brown-Thrasher would have received no more than a jeering shout in
reply.

Naturally, he hoped for something more satisfactory than that.