XV

THE INVITATION


THE morning was not gone before Jasper Jay had four callers. There was
Bobbie Bobolink, Jolly Robin, Miss Kitty Catbird and Buddy
Brown-Thrasher.

Jasper Jay was surprised to see them, because it was seldom that anybody
but his relations called on him. Of course, if one makes himself
disagreeable--as Jasper generally did--people do not go out of their way
to see him. But it was different with Jasper Jay's relations. Some of
them were just as unmannerly and ill-bred as he was. When they came to
see Jasper they were usually looking for a quarrel. And they always
found what they were looking for at the house of their cousin, Jasper
Jay.

Naturally, he did not like to disappoint his own cousins. He had even
been known to quarrel with his great-grandfather--which is something
most people refuse flatly to do.

"Are you hunting for trouble?" Jasper inquired, as he raised his crest
and snapped his bill together, looking as fierce as he could.

Such conduct was enough to frighten any lady. And it was no wonder that
Jasper's actions--as well as his words--sent Miss Kitty Catbird into a
flutter of alarm. Her companions, however, told her there was no danger.
And Jolly Robin, who was a bold fellow, hopped forward to do the talking
for the callers.

"We're a committee," said he, "chosen to call on you and invite you to
join the Pleasant Valley Singing Society."

When he heard Jolly Robin's explanation, Jasper Jay laughed in his
callers' faces.

"I'm not musical," he said. "And people who get up early in the morning
to sing before breakfast always amuse me. They're silly--that's what
they are!" he cried.

"Well, the Society wants you, all the same," Jolly insisted.

Jasper Jay said nothing for a few moments. He was thinking. And it
occurred to him, as he thought, that he could have a good deal of sport
by joining the Society and spoiling its concerts. So he said at last:

"I'll become a member of your Society on one condition."

"What's that?" Jolly Robin inquired.

"You must let me sing all I want to."

Jolly Robin looked at his companions. And seeing that they all nodded
their heads, he asked Jasper if he would promise to sing his best.

Jasper Jay said promptly that he would. So Jolly told him that it was a
bargain. "You shall come to our next meeting and make all the music you
want to," he promised.

So that was the way Jasper Jay became a member of the Pleasant Valley
Singing Society.

"When's your next meeting?" Jasper asked.

"To-night, just before sunset!" Jolly replied. "We'll gather in the
maple grove, near the sugar-house. And we'll look for you."

"I'll be there without fail," Jasper Jay assured him.

The committee left him then. And Jasper's unpleasant laughter rang in
their ears for a long time afterward.

But when he stopped laughing, Jasper decided to keep very still for the
rest of the day. He wanted to save his voice for the concert at sunset.