CHAPTER VII.

THE VISIT.


The plain though comfortable breakfast of dry toast, baked potatoes and
black tea was over. This morning it had been eaten from the kitchen
table; for, as Mr. Hastings had surmised, it was _washing day_, and on
such occasions, wishing to save work, Mrs. Deane would not suffer the
dining-room to be occupied. To this arrangement the proud Eugenia
submitted the more readily, as she knew that at this hour they were not
liable to calls; so she who had talked of her _waiting-maid_ and
wealthy uncle to Mrs. Hastings, sat down to breakfast _with_ her
waiting-maid eating her potatoes with a knife and cooling her tea in
her saucer; two points which in the parlor she loudly denounced as
positive marks of ill breeding, but which in the kitchen, where there
was no one to see her, she found vastly convenient! Piles of soiled
clothes were scattered over the floor, and from a tub standing near, a
volume of steam was rising, almost hiding from view the form of Dora
Deane, whose round red arms were diving into the suds, while she to
herself was softly repeating the lesson in History, that day to be
recited by her class, and which she had learned the Saturday night
previous, well knowing that Monday's duties would keep her from school
the entire day.

In the chamber above--her long, straight hair plaited up in braids, so
as to give it the wavy appearance she had so much admired in Mrs.
Hastings--her head enveloped in a black silk apron and her hands
incased in buckskin gloves, was Eugenia, setting her room to rights,
and complaining with every breath of her hard lot, in being thus
obliged to exert herself on hot summer mornings.

"Don't you wish yon were rich as Mrs. Hastings?" asked Alice, who
chanced to come in.

"That I do," returned Eugenia. "I have been uncomfortable and
discontented ever since I called upon her, for I can't see why there
should be such a difference. She has all the money, servants and
dresses which she wants, besides the handsomest and most elegant man
for a husband; while I, Eugenia Deane, who am ten times smarter than
she, and could appreciate these things so much better, am obliged to
make all sorts of shifts, just to keep up appearances. But didn't I
impress her with a sense of my _greatness!_" she added, after a pause,
and Alice rejoined, "Particularly when you talked of your
_waiting-maid!_ I don't see, Eugenia, how you dare do such things, for
of course Mrs. Hastings will eventually know that you mean Dora."

"I'm not so sure of that," returned Eugenia; "and even if she does, I
fancy I have tact enough to smooth it over with her, for she is not
very deep."

For a moment Alice regarded her sister intently, and then said, "I
wonder from whom you take your character for deception."

"I've dwelt upon that subject many a time myself," answered Eugenia,
"and I have at last come to the conclusion that as father was not
famous for sense of any kind, I must be a second and revised edition of
mother--but hark, don't you hear the roll of wheels?" And springing up,
she reached the window just as Mrs. Hastings alighted from her carriage
which stood before the gate.

"Great goodness!" she exclaimed, "there's Mrs. Hastings coming here to
call--and _I_ in this predicament. What _shall_ I do?"

"Let her wait, of course, until we change our dresses," answered Alice,
and rushing down the Stairs, Eugenia bade Dora "show the lady into the
parlor," adding, "and if she asks for me, say I am suffering from a
severe headache, but you presume I will see her."

Perfectly delighted at the idea of standing face to face with a person
of whom she had heard so much, Dora removed her high-necked apron, and
throwing it across the tub so that the sleeves trailed upon the floor,
was hurrying away, when her foot becoming accidentally entangled in the
apron, she fell headlong to the floor, bringing with her _tub_, _suds_,
_clothes_ and all! To present herself in this drenched condition was
impossible, and in a perfect tremor lest Mrs. Hastings should go away,
Eugenia vibrated, brush in hand, between her own chamber and the head
of the kitchen stairs, scolding Dora unmercifully in the one place, and
pulling at the long braids of her hair in the other.

At last, just as Mrs. Hastings was about despairing of being heard, and
was beginning to think that possibly her husband might be right and
Eugenia in the _suds_ after all, a chubby, brown-faced girl appeared,
and after giving her a searching, curious glance, shewed her into the
parlor.

"Are the young ladies at home?" asked Mrs. Hastings; and Dora, who had
never told a falsehood in her life, and had no intention of doing so
now, replied that they were and would soon be down; after which, with a
low courtesy she went back to the scene of her late disaster, while
Mrs. Hastings busied herself awhile by looking around the room which,
though small, was very handsomely furnished.

At last, beginning to grow sleepy, she took up a book and succeeded in
interesting herself so far as to nod quite approvingly, when the rustle
of female garments aroused her, and in a moment Eugenia and Alice swept
into the room. Both were tastefully dressed, while about Eugenia there
was an air of languor befitting the _severe headache,_ of which Mrs.
Hastings was surprised to hear.

"Then _that girl_ didn't tell you as I bade her to do," said Eugenia;
adding, that "Mrs. Hastings must have thought her very rude to keep her
so long waiting."

But Mrs. Hastings was too good-natured to think anything, and, after a
few commonplace remarks, she told the object of her call, saying, that
"the fresh air would, undoubtedly, do Eugenia good." In this opinion
the young lady fully concurred, and, half an hour later, she was slowly
riding through the principal streets of Dunwood, wondering if her
acquaintances did not envy her for being on such terms of intimacy with
the fashionable Mrs. Hastings. Very politely were the young ladies
received by Mr. Hastings, on their arrival at Rose Hill, and throughout
the entire day their admiration, both for the place and its owner,
increased, though Eugenia could not conceal from herself the fact, that
she stood very much in fear of the latter, whose keen black eyes seemed
to read her very thoughts. How such a man came to marry Ella Grey, was
to her a puzzle; and if occasionally she harbored the thought that
Eugenia Deane was far better suited to be the mistress of Howard
Hastings's home than the childish creature he had chosen, she was only
guilty of what had, in a similar manner, been done by more than one New
York belle. Dinner being over, Ella led the way to an upper balcony,
which opened from her chamber, and which was a cool, shaded spot.
Scarcely were they seated, when remembering something she had left in
the parlor, she went back for it, and, in returning, she ran up the
stairs so swiftly that a sudden dizziness came over her, and with a low
cry she fell half fainting into the arms of her husband, who bent
tenderly over her, while Eugenia made many anxious inquiries as to what
was the matter, and if she were often thus affected.

"Yes, often," answered Ella, who began to revive; then, as the
perspiration gathered thickly about the white lips, she pressed her
blue-veined hand upon her side, and cried, "The pain--the pain! It has
come again. Country air won't do me any good. I shall die of
consumption, just as mother said." And as if she saw indeed the little
grave, on which the next summer's sun would shine, she hid her face in
her husband's bosom, and sobbed aloud. Instantly a dark thought flashed
upon Eugenia--a thought which even _she_ would not harbor, and casting
it aside, she drew nearer to the weeping Ella, striving by an increased
tenderness of manner to atone for having dared to think of a time when
the little willow chair on the balcony would be empty, and Howard
Hastings free. Soon rallying, Ella feigned to smile at her
discomposure, saying that "consumption had been preached to her so much
that she always felt frightened at the slightest pain in her side,"
thoughtlessly adding, as she glanced at her husband, "I wonder if
Howard would miss me any, were I really to die."

A dark shadow settled upon Mr. Hastings's face, but he made no reply;
and Eugenia, who was watching him, fancied she could read his thoughts;
but when they at last started for home, and she saw how tenderly he
wrapped a warm shawl around his delicate young wife, who insisted upon
going with them, she felt that however frivolous and uncompanionable
Ella might be, she was Howard Hastings's wife, and, as such, he would
love and cherish her to the last.

By her window in the attic sat Dora Deane, poring over to-morrow's
lessons; but as the silvery voice of Ella fell upon her ear, she arose,
and going to her cousin's chamber, looked out upon the party as they
drew near the gate.

"How beautiful she is!" she whispered to herself, as, dropping her
shawl, and flinging back her golden curls, Ella sprang up to reach a
branch of locust blossoms, which grew above her head.

Then, as she saw how carefully Mr. Hastings replaced the shawl, drawing
his wife's arm within his own, she stole back to her room, and,
resuming her seat by the window, dreamed, as maidens of thirteen will,
of a time away in the future, when she, too, might perhaps be loved
even as was the gentle Ella Hastings.

       *       *       *       *       *