CHAPTER IX.

DORA AT ROSE HILL.


Summer was over. The glorious September days were gone. The hazy
October had passed away, and the autumn winds had swept the withered
leaves from the tall trees which grew around Rose Hill; when one cold,
rainy November morning, a messenger was sent to Mrs. Deane, saying that
Mrs. Hastings was sick, and wished to see her.

"Mrs. Hastings sent for mother! How funny! There must be some mistake,"
said Eugenia, putting her head in at the door. "Are you sure it was
mother?"

"Yes, quite sure," answered the man. "Mrs. Hastings thought she would
know what to do for the baby, which was born yesterday, and is a puny
little thing."

This silenced Eugenia, who waited impatiently until nightfall, when her
mother returned with a sad account of affairs at Rose Hill. Mrs.
Hastings was sick and nervous, Mrs. Leah was lazy and cross, the
servants ignorant and impertinent, the house was in disorder; while Mr.
Hastings, with a cloud on his face, ill befitting a newly-made father,
stalked up and down the sick-room, looking in vain for an empty chair,
so filled were they with blankets, towels, baby's dresses, and the
various kinds of work which Ella was always beginning and never
finishing.

"Such an ignorant, helpless creature I never saw," said Mrs. Deane,
"Why, she _don't know anything_--and such looking rooms! I don't wonder
her servants give her so much trouble; but my heart ached for him, poor
man, when I saw him putting away the things, and trying to make the
room a little more comfortable."

It was even as Mrs. Deane had said. Ella, whose favorite theory was, "a
big house, a lot of things, and _chairs_ enough to put them in," was
wholly unprepared for sickness, which found her in a sad condition. To
be sure there were quantities of French embroidery, thread lace and
fine linen, while the bed, on which she lay, cost a hundred dollars,
and the rosewood crib was perfect of its kind, but there was a great
lack of neatness and order; and as day after day Mr. Hastings stood
with folded arms, looking first from one window and then from the
other, his thoughts were far from being agreeable, save when he bent
over the cradle of his first-born, and then there broke over his face a
look of unutterable tenderness, which was succeeded by a shade of deep
anxiety as his eye rested upon his frail young wife, whose face seemed
whiter even than the pillow on which it lay.

After a few weeks, during which time Ella had gained a little strength
and was able to see her friends, Eugenia came regularly to Rose Hill,
sitting all day by the bedside of the invalid, to whom she sometimes
brought a glass of water, or some such trivial thing. Occasionally,
too, she would look to see if the baby were asleep, pronouncing it "a
perfect little cherub, just like its mother;" and there her services
ended, for it never occurred to her that she could make the room much
more cheerful by picking up and putting away the numerous articles
which lay scattered around, and which were a great annoyance to the
more orderly Mr. Hastings. Once, when Ella, as usual, was expatiating
upon her goodness, asking her husband if she were not the best girl in
the world, and saying "they must make her some handsome present in
return for all she had done," he replied, "I confess, I should think
more of Miss Deane, if she did you any real good, or rendered you any
actual service; but, as far as I can discover, she merely sits here
talking to you until you are wearied out."

"Why, what would you have her do?" asked Ella, her large blue eyes
growing larger and bluer.

"I hardly know myself," answered Mr. Hastings; "but it seems to me that
a genuine woman could not sit day after day in such a disorderly room
as this."

"Oh, Howard!" exclaimed Ella, "you surely cannot expect Eugenia Deane
to do a servant's duty. Why, she has been as delicately brought up as
I, and knows quite as little of work."

"More shame for her if this is true," answered Mr. Hastings somewhat
bitterly, and Ella continued.

"You've got such queer ideas, Howard, of _woman's duties._ I should
suppose you would have learned, ere this, that few ladies are like your
mother, who, though a blessed good soul, has the oddest notions."

"But they make a man's home mighty comfortable, those odd notions of
mother's," said Mr. Hastings; then, knowing how useless it would be to
argue the point, he was about changing the subject, when the new nurse,
who had been there but a few days (the first one having quarreled with
Mrs. Leah, and gone home), came in and announced her intention of
leaving also, saying, "she would not live in the same house with old
mother Leah!"

It was in vain that Mr. Hastings tried to soothe the angry girl--she
was determined, and for a second time was Ella left alone.

"Oh, what will become of me?" she groaned, as the door closed upon her
late nurse. "Do, pray, Howard, go to the kitchen and get me
some--some--_I don't know what,_ but get me _something!_"

With a very vague idea as to what he was to get or to do, Mr. Hastings
left the room just as it was entered by Eugenia, to whom Ella detailed
her grievances. "Her head ached dreadfully, Howard was cross, and her
nurse gone. Oh, Eugenia!" she cried, "what shall I do? I wish I could
die. Don't ever get married. What shall I do?"

And hiding her face in the pillow, poor Ella sobbed bitterly. For a
time Eugenia stood, revolving the propriety of offering Dora as a
substitute in the place of the girl who had just left. "Mother can work
a little harder," she thought. "And Alice can help her occasionally. It
will please Mr. Hastings, I know. Poor man, _I pity him!_"

So, more on account of the _pity_ she felt for Mr. Hastings, than for
the _love_ she bore his wife, she said at last, "We have a little girl
at our house, who is very capable for one of her years. I think she
would be quite handy in a sick-room. At all events, she can rock the
baby. Shall I send her up until you get some one else?"

"Oh, if you only would," answered Ella. "I should be so glad,"

So, it was arranged that _Dora_ should come next morning, and then
Eugenia, who was this time in a hurry, took her leave, having first
said that Mrs. Hastings "needn't think strange if Dora called _her_
cousin and her mother _aunt,_ for she was a poor relation, whom they
had taken out of charity!"

At first Mrs. Deane objected to letting her niece go, "for she was
needed at home," she said; but Eugenia finally prevailed, as she
generally did, and the next morning Dora, who was rather pleased with
the change, started bundle in hand for Rose Hill. She had never been
there before, and she walked leisurely along, admiring the beautiful
house and grounds, and thinking Mrs. Hastings must be very happy to
live in so fine a place. Ella was unusually nervous and low-spirited
this morning, for her husband had gone to Rochester; and when Dora was
shown into the room she was indulging in a fit of crying, and paid no
attention whatever when Mrs. Leah said, "This is the new girl." "She'll
get over it directly," muttered the housekeeper, as she went from the
room, leaving Dora inexpressibly shocked at witnessing such grief in
one whom she had thought so happy.

"Can I do anything for you?" she said at last, drawing near, and
involuntarily laying her hand on the golden curls she had so much
admired.

There was genuine sympathy in the tones of that childish voice, which
touched an answering chord in Ella's heart, and lifting up her head she
gazed curiously at the little brown-faced girl, who stood there neatly
attired in a dress of plain dark calico, her auburn hair, which had
grown rapidly, combed back from her open brow, and her dark-blue eyes
full of tears. No one could mistake Dora Deane for a menial, and few
could look upon her without being at once interested; for early sorrow
had left a shade of sadness upon her handsome face, unusual in one so
young. Then, too, there was an expression of goodness and truth shining
out all over her countenance, and Ella's heart yearned towards her at
once as towards a long-tried friend. Stretching out her white, wasted
hand, she said, "And you are _Dora._ I am glad you have come. The sight
of you makes me feel better already," and the small, rough hand she
held was pressed with a fervor which showed that she was sincere in
what she said. It was strange how fast they grew to liking each
other--those two children--for in everything save years, Ella was
younger far than Dora Deane; and it was strange, too, what a change the
little girl's presence wrought in the sick-chamber. Naturally neat and
orderly, she could not sit quietly down in the midst of disorder, and
as far as she was able, she put things in their proper places; then, as
her quick-seeing eye detected piles of dust which for days had been
unmolested, she said, "Will it disturb you if I sweep?"

"Not at all. Do what you like," answered Ella, her own spirits rising
in proportion as the appearance of her surroundings was improved.

Everything was in order at last. The carpet was swept, the furniture
dusted, the chairs emptied, the curtains looped back, and the hearth
nicely washed. Fresh, clean linen was put upon the pillows, while
Ella's tangled curls were carefully brushed and tucked under her
tasteful cap, and then for the first time Dora took the baby upon her
lap. It was a little thing, but very beautiful to the young mother, and
beautiful, too, to Dora, when she learned that its name was "Fannie."

"_Fannie!_" how it carried her back to the long ago, when her father
had spoken, and her precious mother had answered to that blessed name!
And how it thrilled her as she repeated it again and again, while her
tears fell like rain on the face of the unconscious infant.

"Why do you cry?" asked Ella, and Dora answered, "I am thinking of
mother. Her name was Fannie, and I shall love the baby for her sake."

"Has your mother long been dead? Tell me of her," said Ella; and
drawing her chair close to the bedside, Dora told the sad story of her
life, while Ella Hastings's tears fell fast and her eyes opened wide
with wonder as she heard of the dreary room, the dead mother, the
bitter cold night, and of the good lady who brought them aid.

Starting up in bed and looking earnestly at Dora, Ella said, "And _you_
are the little girl whom Howard and Mrs. Elliott found sleeping on her
mother's neck that New Year's morning. But God didn't let you freeze.
He saved you to live with me, which you will do always. And I will be
to you a sister, for I know you must be good."

And the impulsive creature threw her arms around the neck of the
astonished Dora, who for some time could not speak, so surprised and
delighted was she to learn that her benefactress was indeed the sister
of Mr. Hastings, After a moment, Ella continued, "And you came to live
with some distant relatives--with Mrs. Deane?"

"Yes, with Aunt Sarah," answered Dora, stating briefly the
comparatively double relationship that existed between herself and her
cousins, and casually mentioning her uncle Nathaniel, whom she had
never seen.

"Then he is _your_ uncle, too--the old East India man, whose heir
Eugenia is to be. I should think he would send _you_ money."

"He never does," said Dora, in a choking voice. "He sent some to
Eugenia once, but none to me," and a tear at her uncle's supposed
coldness fell on the baby's head.

Ella was puzzled, but she could not doubt the truth of what Dora had
said, though she wisely refrained from betraying Eugenia, in whom her
confidence was slightly shaken, but was soon restored by the appearance
of the young lady herself, who overwhelmed her with caressess, and went
into ecstasies over the little Fannie, thus surely winning her way to
the mother's heart. Owing to a severe cold from which Eugenia was
suffering, she left for home about dark, and soon after her departure,
Ella began to expect her husband.

"If you will tell me where to find his dressing-gown and slippers, I'll
bring them out for him," said Dora, wheeling up before the glowing
grate the large easy-chair which she felt almost sure was occupied by
Mr. Hastings.

"His gown and slippers!" repeated Ella. "It's an age since I saw them,
but I guess they are in the dressing-room, either behind the door, or
in the black trunk, or on the shelf--or, stay, I shouldn't wonder if
they were on the _closet floor._"

And there, under a promiscuous pile of other garments, Dora found them,
sadly soiled, and looking as if they had not seen the light for many a
day. Shaking out the gown, and brushing the dust from off the slippers,
she laid them in the chair, and Ella, who was watching her, said,
"Pray, what put that into your mind?"

"I don't know," returned Dora; "only I thought, perhaps, you did so,
when you were well Ever so long ago, before pa died, mother made him a
calico dressing-gown, and he used to look so pleased when he found it
in his chair."

"Strange I never thought of such things," softly whispered Ella,
unconsciously learning a lesson from the little domestic girl, who
brushed the hearth, dropped the curtains, lighted the lamp, and then
went out to the kitchen in quest of milk for Fannie.

"He will be so happy and pleased!" said Ella, as, lifting up her head,
she surveyed the cheerful room.

And happy indeed he was. It was the first time he had left his wife
since her illness, and with a tolerable degree of satisfaction he took
his seat in the evening cars. We say _tolerable_, for though he was
really anxious to see Ella and the baby, he was in no particular haste
to see the room in which he had left them; and rather reluctantly he
entered his handsome dwelling, starting back when he opened the door of
the sick chamber, and half thinking he had mistaken another man's house
for his own. But Ella's voice reassured him, and in a few moments he
had heard from her the story of Dora Deane, who ere long came in, and
was duly presented. Taking her hand in his, and looking down upon her
with his large black eyes, he said, "I have seen you before, I believe,
but I did not then think that when we met again I should be so much
indebted to you. I am glad you are here, Dora."

Once before had he held that hand in his, and now, as then, the touch
sent the warm blood bounding through her veins. She had passed through
much since that wintry morning, had grown partially indifferent to
coldness and neglect, but the extreme kindness of Mr. and Mrs. Hastings
touched her heart; and stammering out an almost inaudible reply, she
turned away to hide her tears, while Mr. Hastings, advancing towards
the fire, exclaimed, "My double gown! And it's so long since I saw it!
To whose thoughtfulness am I indebted for this?"

"'Twas Dora," answered Ella. "She thinks of everything. She is my good
angel, and I mean to keep her always, if she will stay. Will you, dear?"

"Oh, if I only could," answered Dora; "but I can't. They need me at
home!"

"Why need you? They have servants enough," said Ella, who had not yet
identified Eugenia's waiting-maid with the bright, intelligent child
before her.

"We have no servants but _me,_" answered the truthful Dora. "We are
poor, and I help Aunt Sarah to pay for my board; so, you see, I can't
stay. And then, too, I must go to school."

Perfectly astonished at this fresh disclosure, Ella glanced towards her
husband, whose quizzical expression kept her silent, for it seemed to
say, "I told you all the time, that Miss Eugenia was not exactly what
you supposed her to be."

"How could she deceive me so?" thought Ella, while Mr. Hastings was
mentally resolving to befriend the child, in whom he felt such a strong
interest.

Wishing to know; something of her education, he questioned her during
the evening concerning her studies, and the books she had read, feeling
surprised and pleased to find how good a scholar she was, considering
her advantages.

"There's the germ of a true, noble woman there. I wish my sister could
have the training of her," he thought, as he saw how animated she
became when he mentioned her favorite books, and then watched her as
she hovered round the bedside of his wife.

Very swiftly and pleasantly passed the three following days, and during
all that time Eugenia did not once appear; but at the close of the
fourth day, a note was brought to Ella, saying that both Eugenia and
her mother were sick, and Dora must come home.

"Oh, how can I let you go?" cried Ella, while Dora crept away into a
corner and wept.

But there was no alternative, and just at dark she came to say good-by.
Winding her feeble arms around her neck, Ella sobbed out her adieu, and
then, burying her face in her pillow, refused to be comforted. One kiss
for the little Fannie--one farewell glance at the weeping Ella, and
then, with a heavy heart, Dora went out from a place where she had been
so happy--went back to the home where no one greeted her kindly, save
the old house cat, who purred a joyous welcome, and rubbed against her
side as she kindled a fire in the dark, dreary kitchen, where, on the
table, were piles of dishes left for her to wash. That night, when, at
a late hour, she stole up to bed, the contrast between her humble room
and the cozy chamber where she had recently slept, affected her
painfully, and, mingled with her nightly prayer, was the petition, that
"sometime she might go back and live with _Mr. Hastings._"

Meantime at Rose Hill there was sorrowing for her, Ella refusing to be
comforted unless she should return, Mr. Hastings, who had spent the day
in the city, and did not come home until evening, felt that something
was wrong the moment he entered the door of his chamber. The fire was
nearly out, the lamp was burning dimly, and Ella was in tears.

"What is it, darling?" he asked, advancing towards her; and laying her
aching head upon his bosom, she told him of her loss, and how much she
missed the little brown-faced girl, who had been so kind to her.

And Howard Hastings missed her too--missed the tones of her gentle
voice, the soft tread of her busy feet, and more than all, missed the
sunlight of comfort she had shed over his home. The baby missed her,
too; for over her Dora had acquired an almost mesmeric influence, and
until midnight her wailing cry smote painfully upon the ear of the
father, who, before the morning dawned, had concluded that Rose Hill
was nothing without Dora Deane. "She shall come back, too," he said,
and the sooner to effect this, he started immediately after breakfast
for the house of Mrs. Deane. Very joyfully the deep blue eyes of Dora,
who met him at the door, looked up into his, and her bright face
flushed with delight when he told her why he had come. Both Eugenia and
her mother were convalescent, and sitting by the parlor fire, the one
in a shilling calico, and the other in a plaid silk morning gown. At
first Mrs. Deane objected, when she heard Mr. Hastings's errand,
saying, with a sudden flash of pride, that "it was not necessary for
her niece to work out."

"And I assure you, it is not our intention to make a servant of her,"
answered Mr. Hastings, "We could not do otherwise than treat so near a
relative of yours as an equal."

This last was well timed, and quite complacently Mrs. Deane listened,
while he told her that if Dora were allowed to stay with them until his
wife was better, she should be well cared for, and he himself would
superintend her studies, so she should lose nothing by being out of
school. "Come, Miss Eugenia," he continued, "please intercede for me,
and, I assure you, both Ella and myself will be eternally grateful."

He had touched the right cord at last. Rumor said that Ella Hastings
would never see another summer, and if before her death the husband was
eternally grateful, what would he not be after her death? Then, too,
but the day before they had received a remittance from Uncle Nat, and
with that they could afford to hire a servant; so, when Eugenia spoke,
it was in favor of letting "_Mr. Hastings have Dora just when he wanted
her_, if it would be any satisfaction to poor dear Ella!"

A while longer Mr. Hastings remained, and when at last he arose to go,
he was as sure that Dora Deane would again gladden his home as he was
next morning, when from his library window he saw her come tripping up
the walk, her cheeks flushed with exercise, and her eyes sparkling with
joy, as, glancing upward, she saw him looking down upon her. In after
years, when Howard Hastings's cup was full of blessings, he often
referred to that morning, saying "he had seldom experienced a moment of
deeper thankfulness than the one when he welcomed back again to his
fireside and his home the orphan Dora Deane."

------------